---
layout: post
title:  "How An Audio Play About a Time Travelling Pony Turned Me Into a Fanboy"
date:   2015-08-30 00:00:00
---

Life is really unpredictable.

You know the cliche interview question,

> "Where do you see yourself in five years?"

There's the answer you're supposed to give: "At the same company, but higher up
the ladder." I've always wondered about the people who actually answer that
both honestly and confidently. How can they be so sure of where their life
will lead? People like that actually *exist?*

If you has asked me that five years ago, I'd have no idea what to say,
but I certainly wouldn't have told you I'd be writing a post
about a MLP x Doctor Who fan series.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

The Short MLP Primer
----------------------------------

My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic is a cartoon about pastel colored horses living
lives with other pastel colored horses.

The main horse (okay, pony) is Twilight
Sparkle, a unicorn prodigy who's incredibly smart and hard working. However,
she's also a bit socially inept, and prone to worrying about everything too much.

It's surprisingly good. Although it takes a while to warm up to it, once you like the
characters the show just clicks and becomes a joy to watch.
Friendship is Magic starts with Twilight saving the world from eternal darkness, then shifts to
slice of life. On rare occasions, it shifts back to adventure, and the main cast have to fight monsters
that escaped Tartarus, or overthrow communistic cults, or save kingdoms from
totalitarian dictators.

Yes, really. All of that is canon.

As for the fandom, the MLP fandom is one of the craziest and most prolific
fandoms in the world, and I proudly count myself as a member.


The Short Doctor Who Primer
----------------------------------

So. I actually haven't watched any Doctor Who.
Everything I know about the show is from Internet osmosis. I'll say what I know,
and apologize in advance for any Doctor Who misrepresentation.
(So to any Whovians reading this: please don't kill me.)

Doctor Who is a long running show by the BBC. I do mean long; the first episode
aired over 50 years ago.

The eponymous Doctor is a Time Lord who time travels in the TARDIS, which looks like
a London police box.
Although he looks human, he's somewhere around 1000 years old.
Whenever he dies, he regenerates into a new form and personality, which keeps the
show fresh. (That's the in-universe explanation. In reality, it's a way to change
the actor.)
Together with a companion (a human who's in on the Doctor's secret), he travels
through time and space, fighting monsters like the Daleks or the Weeping Angels.
Or, he resolves the local trouble he sees in this part of the multiverse.
Most likely,
he's doing both at the same time, all while being either a little too insane
or not insane enough.


So....Why Are There MLP x Doctor Who Crossovers?
----------------------------------

Some people noticed there was a recurring background pony with hair very similar
to David Tennant's,
the then current Doctor's actor. He also had a cutie mark of an hourglass,
meaning his special talent was related to *time.*

(two pictures)

When you combine those two details with the craziness of the MLP fandom,
there's only one reasonable outcome.
Fans quickly christened him  "Doctor Whooves"
and to this day he's one of the most popular fan characters. There's tons
of fanart and fanfic, and at least five currently running audio/comic
series.

(the awesome fanart picture)


The Adventure Begins
---------------------------

Among those fanfics was one titled "Number 12", by SqueakAnon. (The name
is accurate. Squeak's gender and real name are both unknown.)

Squeak's take was that Doctor Whooves was the 12th Doctor (the show
was on the 11th at the moment). The story starts with the TARDIS crashing into
Twilight's home, and ends with Twilight becoming the Doctor's companion.

A while later, Sqeuak decided to take it one step further. He or she contacted other
members of the fandom, and formed Pony In A Box Productions. Their mission:
to create a full-fledged radio play.
Their first episode was an adaptation of "Number 12", and ever since they've been releasing
new episodes under the banner "Doctor Whooves Adventures".

And now we come to *me*. Around two years ago, I decided to listen to a few
episodes. At first, it was just entertaining, but just like with MLP, at
some point I realized Pony in a Box had stolen my heart, locked it away and threw away
the key, and I didn't even care. I love this series so, so much. I actually find
it difficult to find things I don't like about it.
"Doctor Whooves Adventures" is in my favorite works of all time list, and it's
singlehandedly convinced me to watch Doctor Who, as soon as I find time for the
inevitable binge.


Why Should You Watch This Show?
--------------------------------
It's funny when it wants to be, but isn't afraid to be sad.
The characters are not only well written but well acted. It mixes the two canons
well: the overarching themes of death and loss from Doctor Who are tempered
by themes of optimism and friendship from MLP. Yet despite taking elements
from both, you don't need to know either MLP or Doctor Who to
enjoy this series. This audio play isn't good because it references to MLP/Doctor
Who canon, it's good because it deserves to be by its own merit.

Below, I'm going to repeat the above, but in many, many more words. Let's get to it!


Production Values
-----------------------------

Normally, you don't expect fan creations to go through much production, which
makes the effort put into Doctor Whooves Adventures all the more surprising.
Pony In A Box holds themselves to high standards, and it shows. First,
the writing staff (led by Squeak) prepares a script. Then, the voice actors
record their lines.
Once done, the sound team comes in, adding background music and
sound effects. (As someone who has done very minor movie editing, this is both
more important and more time consuming than it sounds.)
At the same time, the art team creates promotional pictures for
the eventual Youtube upload.
Every episode is a huge labor of love, and it shows in the end product. Here's
an excerpt from "Bells of Fate", my favorite episode. Although I've provided the
transcript, I recommend listening to the audio instead - I can't convey the delivery
any other way.

(Mayhew segment)


Unfortunately, it also means each episode takes
a long time to finish. I've been waiting for the conclusion to Bells of
Fate for over a year. Still, it's coming out soon! Meaning,
they targeted August of this year and it's already September...but it is happening
and I can't begrudge the team too much because I know how long these things can take.


The Writing
----------------------------------

The writing and voice acting for this series is top notch. The strength of the
vocal cast is a huge asset here, since the way someone says something can convey
more than the words themselves.
Because the writers can trust the voice actors, every line can focus on driving
the plot forward without sacrificing characterization.

Again, I recommended listening to the audio over reading the transcript. From
"Chords of Chaos":

> "So, now that you've got me [in the TARDIS], I've realized this is completely insane."
>
> "I've been at it so long I'd stopped noticing."

And although there's plenty of deadpan humor to go around, the writers aren't
afraid to get heartwrenching.

(Penny Dreadful, or excerpt from Number 12, ending of Bells of Fate?)

Another strength of the writing is that the show makes a point of having strong female
characters and a gender balanced cast. (Aside: this is true of most MLP fanwork. When a
fandom grows in open defiance of gender stereotypes, people pay a lot of attention
to portraying gender and sexuality realistically. It's a beautiful part of the fandom.)
Twilight's a fantastic companion; as one of the smartest ponies in MLP canon,
she's probably the only character that can keep up with the Doctor. She
solves problems and gets herself out of trouble almost as often as the Doctor does,
and although the Doctor knows much more than she ever will, Twilight is still the one
who knows the most about the world of My Little Pony, letting them teach and get taught
in turn.

In poorly written stories, it feels like plots happen because someone willed it to
happen. In this series, it's more like the writers drop a seed, and everything happens
organically from the characters playing off each other. That, there, is the show's
greatest strength. Because the characters are defined so well, it doesn't need to
rely on MLP knowledge or Doctor Who knowledge. It can stand on its two legs,
and be entertaining in its own right.


Parting Remarks
-----------------------------

If you do decided to listen to the series, I recommend listening in episode order.
However, each story arc is only 2-3 episodes long, and there's very little continuity
between them, so you're free to jump around.
If an episode isn't working for you, here's my short list.

- Number 12 Part 1 + 2. You absolutely need to start here, no questions. It's not
the best episode, but this introduces the main cast, so it's unskippable.
- Bells of Fate. My favorite episode. Great mythology influences, and the two
plots tie together elegantly. Fun fact: this episode actually got me into Irish
music.
- Rhapsody in Blue Box. Watch the short Cell Mates first. Tugs at the heartstrings more
than any other.
- Wrong Way Backwards Parts 1 + 2 + 3 + 1 + 2 + 3. You'll see what I mean. Timey wimey,
wibbly wobbly, and all around excellent. This episode's construction is
the most impressive, but it's admittedly quite long.

The remaining episodes (Shadows of the Lunar Republic, Chords of Chaos,
Pony of the Opera) are fun, but not as strong as the rest.


\*\*\*
{: .centered }

Maybe my love for this series will fade. (But it's hard to see that happening.)

Maybe Doctor Whooves Adventures will die a slow death, as the creators lose interest.
(But I hope that never comes to pass.)

The only thing I'm certain about is that I'll never be certain about how my
tastes will shift. The best I can do is to stay open to change, and to keep
reaching.

Until next time. In the words of the good Doctor himself,

(Definitely add some pictures here)

> "Onwards and upwards!"
{: .centered }

