---
layout: page
title: Stories I Have Read Online, Which You Can Only Read Online, Which You Should Try Reading (Online)
date:   2048-01-01 00:00:00
---

*Last updated November 21, 2015*

I read a lot more web fiction than the average, probably because I have a barely functioning
social life. Almost all stories I've read the past few years were published
online. There's something very addicting about being able to read a story wherever
I have Internet access. With smartphones, that means practically anywhere.

On one hand, I've missed out on very good books that were published
traditionally. On the other hand, I'm slightly more qualified to recommend
stories that people wouldn't normally hear about.

I intend to write more in-depth reviews for some of these recommendations, and will
link those when done.
To stop this page from getting too unwieldly, **every recommendation that doesn't
link to a full blog post review gets three sentences max.**

For now, I'm restricting myself to text only content. No webcomics, no audio plays,
no video series or animations.

Within each category, stories are ordered by how much I enjoyed them.


Stories are organized by fandom, then quality, then author. Within each subcategory,
grouping works by author takes priority over ordering by quality.

Stories labeled with a ** are good enough that I recommend them even if you are
unfamiliar with the source material.

- Clobbered for auto generated table of contents
{:toc}


# Overall favorites

The other stories are good. These are better.

Worm, by Wildbow

Status: Completed

https://parahumans.wordpress.com/about/

Vivid characters in a slowly evolving world where superpowers are real.
Everything about the world feels organic and realistic. Dark and gritty
with lots of entertaining fights that are won by cleverness instead of
brute strength.

Fallout Equestria, by kkat (MLP x Fallout)

Status: Completed

http://www.fimfiction.net/story/119190/fallout-equestria

Much like Worm, this asks how people (or ponies in this case) act when the
chips are down. Blends MLP and Fallout canon very cleverly, but is good enough
that you should try reading it even if you know nothing about either.
When the author can make a pool of water scarier than a squad of raiders, you
know you have something special.


ORIGINAL CONTENT

You see a blank piece of paper, and I see potential.

Pact, by Wildbow

Status: Completed

https://pactwebserial.wordpress.com/about/

Modern supernatural. Workings of the world are explicitly kept vague and
ill-defined, which can be frustrating at times.
Strong start that peters out in the middle, but the final arcs make up for it.


Twig, by Wildbow

Status: In Progress (updates 2-3 times a week.)

https://twigserial.wordpress.com/about/

A biopunk story set in the early 1900s. This is in progress, so the big picture
is still unfolding. So far, everything has been a nice mix of entertainingly awesome
and subtly (or not so subtly) horrifying.



Ra, by qntm

Status: Completed

http://qntm.org/ra

Magic breaks the laws of physics, but it still has to follow the laws of magic.
A hard science fiction story where characters try to discover what magic can
and cannot do. There is no shame in looking up concepts you don't know;
this is a story that cites Godel's Incompleteness Theorems in relevant context.


Fine Structure, by qntm

Status: Completed

http://qntm.org/structure
 
A hard science fiction story told through many perspectives in anachronic order,
eventually converging into a coherent narrative.
The height of my addiction was in my second reading of the story, not the first,
because I knew what was going on the second time through.
The characterization is weak, but this story is carried by its ideas,
not its characters.




Other Short Stories, by qntm

http://qntm.org/fiction

Recommended ones:
- I don't know, Timmy, being God is a big responsibility
- The Difference
- The Last-But-One Question
- Causal Noose
- Gorge


HARRY POTTER

Yer a wizard, Harry.

Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality, by Eliezer Yudkowsky

Status: Completed

http://hpmor.com/

Harry Potter grows up in a loving household and spends most of his childhood
reading books about physics, chemistry, cognitive science, probability, etc.
He goes to Hogwarts, and then things get complicated.
This tends to be a love it or hate it story.


Harry Potter and the Natural 20, by Sir Poley (Harry Potter x D&D)

Status: Unfinished, possibly dead

https://www.fanfiction.net/s/8096183/1/Harry-Potter-and-the-Natural-20

A munchkin from the D&D universe drops into the Harry Potter universe, and abuses
both systems of magic to much hilarity. Starts off funny, then slowly leads to
real character development and drama. For all encounters, the author rolled
dice in real life before deciding what to write next, and Milo actually has
a character sheet (which is unfortunately out of date.)

MY LITTLE Pony: Friendship is Magic

You may have destroyed the Elements, but you can't destory the most powerful
magic of all: the magic of friendship!

MLP Loops, by many people (MLP x everything)

Status: Ongoing

Spoils: Up through end of season 3. Writers incorporate new episodes as they
get aired, so the latest chapters spoil up through the latest episode.

http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/FanFic/TheInfiniteLoops

A strangely addictive anthology of short stories where characters are stuck
in Groundhog Day time loops. Starts arbitrary, then build an increasingly
elaborate canon over time. There are other time loop stories for other
fandoms, but the MLP one is the biggest.


Hard Reset, by Eakin

Status: Complete

Spoils: Up through end of season 2. Sequels spoil through end of season 3.

LINK

Twilight Sparkle gets stuck in a time loop right before an alien invasion
comes to destroy the city, and she has all of eternity to find out how to
stop it. Think Edge of Tomorrow with more emphasis on the psychological damage
that could happen.
Pretty short with an excellent ending chapter.

Followed by A Stitch in Time (romantic comedy with some adventure), then concluded
by You Can Fight Fate (adventure).



Friendship is Optimal, by Iceman

Status: Complete

Spoils: Nothing. (You can actually read this without knowing MLP, since it's
set on Earth.)

http://www.fimfiction.net/story/62074/friendship-is-optimal

Hanna is the CEO of Hofvarpnir Studios, and after the success
of their AI generated shooter The Fall of Asgard, they've been
contacted to make an MMO for My Little Pony.
At its core, this is a story about AI, not about people. It makes it somewhat
alien to read through, but I still liked it.


Friendship is Optimal: The Law Offices of Artemis, Stella & Beat, by Eakin

Status: Complete

Spoils: Nothing (except Friendship is Optimal)

http://www.fimfiction.net/story/70441/friendship-is-optimal-the-law-offices-of-artemis-stella-beat

Fan-fanfiction based on Friendship is Optimal from the
perspective of a lawyer. I liked this over
Friendship is Optimal because it's grounded more in human interaction.
Unfortunately, you do need to read about 2/3rd of Friendship is Optimal to
appreciate this.


A Taste of The Good Life, by Eakin

Status: Complete

Spoils: Up through end of season 2

http://www.fimfiction.net/story/134645/a-taste-of-the-good-life

A romantic slice of life story that stays light throughout.
The plot is predictable from a mile away, but that doesn't make it bad because
the execution is solid.



WORM

Doing the wrong things for the right reasons.

Cenotaph, by notes

Status: Completed

Spoils: Up to the end of Worm, but does so obliquely. Major plot points of
Worm won't get spoiled.

http://archiveofourown.org/works/1152749/chapters/2337442

An original flavor AU where Taylor decides to take matters into her own hands.
The writing style is concise, and every word feels deliberate.
If you liked Worm, you will almost certainly like Cenotaph.

Followed by Wake, then Legacy. Wake is completed and Legacy is in progress.

Manager, by Sereviel

Status: In Progress, sporadic updates

Spoils: Up to the end of Worm. Will spoil some major plot points.

http://archiveofourown.org/works/1536152/chapters/3251618

An AU where Taylor triggers with a completely broken power, and uses it to
troll the entire setting. At the same time, her power still has limits, which lets
her avoid Mary Sue issues. Lighthearted and all around fun.
