---
layout: post
title:  "Six Months of Blogging: A Retrospective"
date:   2016-02-18 00:15:00 -0800
---

A few days ago, I noticed I was coming up on six months since my
[personal site reboot](http://www.alexirpan.com/2015/08/18/hello-world-again.html).
Half a year seemed like a good milestone to look back on.
Every blog inevitably talks about itself, and now's the time.
(I'll admit it also gives me a good reason to link lots of old posts.)

When I started blogging, I had three goals.

* Introduce people to interesting technical concepts, with focus on concepts that
don't rely on too much prior knowledge.
* Make it easy for me to practice writing by giving myself a platform to share
ideas to a wider audience, then actually write posts.
* Write about somethign itneresting?

So far, I'd say I'm making good progress on the first, okay on the second, and
not very much on the third. I expected my blog to be much more cohesive than
it became. My guess was 50% technical posts and 50% posts about stories I liked,
but it ended up becoming more like an extension of my thoughts, which are
off-the-wall almost by choice.

(TODO better introduction.)


Github Pages Was A Good Call
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Although there was upfront cost, hosting on Github Pages was definitely a good
call. Free web hosting that auto-scales if I need it to is a huge plus, and I
don't have any interactive content anyways. (Not that I need the auto-scaling...)

It's a bit annoying that I had to add analytics and comments by myself,
but the gains outweigh the losses by far. This is a very programmer thing to
say, but writing my blog posts in vim has been wonderful. (For the record,
I'm not text editor-ist. Emacs and Sublime are welcome to hang out.)
Like I said in my first post: WYSIWYG editors be damned, all I need is a
terminal.

It's also nice that if I choose to, I could tweak the styling of my site
as much as I wanted. Complete transparent control over my site's content is
a beautiful thing. When I needed to add math, I could easily choose to use
KaTeX instead of MathJax. And when it turned out KaTeX and kramdown didn't
mix well, I could write the Javascript hotfix myself.
(Don't ask how the regex works, it just does.)



Holy Shit, Writing Takes Time
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As someone who's struggled with essays his whole life, I knew writing was hard.
What I didn't expect was to always, always take longer than I thought to
write something. Note that this is with knowing about planning fallacy from
day one. *I gave myself leeway, and still overshot it every time.*

> Hofstadter's Law: It always takes longer than you expect, even when you take into account Hofstadter's Law.

(Douglas Hofstadter, *Gödel, Escher, Bach*)
{: .centered}

My most productive blogging hours start near midnight, and I've definitely
lost sleep while revising drafts. In fact, I'm doing it right now! Check
the commit history for this post, you'll find a commit at 1 AM Pacific time. I need
to wake up early too...

In fact, let's look at my first technical post, about how to [efficiently turn a
fair coin into a biased one](http://www.alexirpan.com/2015/08/23/simulating-a-biased-coin-with-a-fair-one.html).
Thanks to Git, I have timestamps of every single commit.

(ADD ALL COMMITS HERE.)



(Incidentally, this is the biggest argument for why you should consider
a [CFAR workshop](http://rationality.org/workshops/) if you have the money.
Knowledge of logical fallacies doesn't
stop you from making them. I haven't done one because the cost is scary and my
mind has lots of inertia, but it's slowly getting more appealing.)

For my post about efficiently biasing a fair coin, I committed my first draft
at 2:05 AM. The next day, I extended it, making a commit at 9 PM and 12:12 AM.
By this point, I decided I needed to finish this post by the weekend. I already
almost had a full first draft done. It shouldn't take too long to revise it, right?
Maybe I stay up until 2 AM at most.

Well...

* Commit on Aug 22, 11:15 PM (finish adding pictures created last night)
* Commit on Aug 23, 1:39 AM (finish first draft)
* Commit on Aug 23, 2:13 AM (first revision)
* Commit on Aug 23, 2:53 AM (more editing, stil can't figure out a good conclusion.)
* Commit on Aug 23, 3:40 AM (figured out a conclusion, revised to be shorter)

Clearly, I realized I wasn't going to finish it this night, so I went to bed, and

* Commit on Aug 23, 5:52 PM (a final revision that changed more than I thought it would.)
* Commit on Aug 23, 5:59 PM (a final pass to catch spelling errors.)

Yeah. My estimate was way off. I *said* I understood that writing took a long time,
but now that I've actually done some of it, I have so much more respect for people
that update their content multiple times a week. I certainly can't do that.
Looking back, I've averaged about one post every two weeks; I don't see myself
getting any faster unless I both invest a lot more time and revise a lot less.


Ideas are Easy, Execution is Hard
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When I started this blog, I worried I'd run out of material to write about.
It turns out the opposite turned true. I have plenty of ideas, enough that I
don't have the time to try writing all of them, and I have to prune them down
to the ones I especially like.

Off the top of my head, I can name four posts I definitely plan to write about,
and one post I definitely won't because it doesn't meet my standards anymore.
Based on my past average, that'll take about two months to finish.

Sometimes, people think they're boring. They think they're nothing special, that
they don't have interesting perspectives or lives. I suppose it's good I don't
know any narcissists.

But now? I'm quite sure the opposite is true.

> Everybody has a secret world inside of them. All of the
> people in the whole world, I mean everybody. No matter how dull and boring they
> are on the outside, inside them they've all got unimaginable, magnificent,
> wonderful, stupid, amazing worlds. Not just one world. Hundreds of them.
> Thousands maybe.

(Neil Geiman, *The Sandman*)
{. :centered }

Everybody's interesting. Everybody's cool. We just don't show it, because it's
so hard to expose it and we worry about being judged and ridiculed for our
own brand of stupidity. It's a wonderfully naive, goofy, idealistic viewpoint,
*and I plan to own the hell out of it.*

I've got the rest of my life to become a cynical old man. Why should I try
to get there any faster?

I still need to write about *Gunnerkrigg Court*, and obsessive fandoms, and
icebergs of effort. Maybe I'll expand on an idea inspired by a quote from
*Fine Structure*: "There was a war in Heaven, and the debris fell to Earth."
But if I'm honest, that's all far out the horizon.


I Actually Have A Writing Style
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I made a deliberate choice to keep this blog as colloquial as possible. It's
my site, I don't give a shit if people look down on me for using contractions
or swearing.

At the same time, I've noticed my writing becomes very reptitive if I'm not careful
about it. I love, love using parallelism. I'm fond of starting sentences with
"And" or "But", because I like how the period before the connective (CHECK?)
stops and starts the reading flow.

I adopted short paragraphs because they're an easy way to highlight specific
ideas.

I start lots of sentences with I, pretending like it's for repetition, but
it's really because it's easier than figuring out more unique sentence
constructions.

I don't if this is my style or if it's just my writing habits. Maybe the two
are the same thing.


Effort Has Weak Correlation With Writing Quality
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The correlation between effort and quality seems obvious, but what surprised
me is how weak it is.

For examples, consider two posts, one about Doctor Whooves Adventures and one
about AlphaGo. The Doctor Whooves Adventures post was in the works for almost
a month, and I spent a long time writing it because I didn't quite know what
I wanted to say. (CHECK THE TIME). In contrast, I wrote the AlphaGo post in a day,
because I wanted to hit the anvil while it was hot. In retrospect, the AlphaGo
post was much, much better. Even accounting for having more experience, I have
trouble believing that a few blog posts of practice let me produce better
content in a day than I could in a month.

The real lesson here is that if writing is the process that turns ideas into
words, then writing is a lot easier if you already have a feeling on what
you want to say.

Of course, you still need to edit, and you still need to revise, but sometimes
you find a good phrasing right away.


More Eyes Is Strongly Correlated With Writing Quality
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I've asked for feedback on three posts: biasing a fair coin, my thoughts on
graduate school, and an introduction to secure computation. Every single
post got astoundingly better once I got other people's feedback.

Everyone can read something only once. Trying to recapture reading with a set
of fresh eyes is hopeless, and eventually the brain glazes over the minor details,
like sentence structures or old ideas. It's been extraordinarily helpful to
get feedback on the tone or clarity of the post.

I've been trying to get better at editing by myself, but even the best writers
have other people read their drafts. There's no shame in it.

(EXPAND? PHIL FISH QUOTE?)


Quality Correlates Weakly With Popularity
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to Google Analytics, my most popular posts are

* Secure Computation
* Grad School Thoughts
* Mystery Hunt 2016 Wrap-Up

Secure computation wins by a mile because I submitted it to HN, and it was
on the front page for a day. Grad School Thoughts got very good traction
among my Facebook friends and I tried submitting it to HN. Mystery Hunt 2016 Wrap-Up
was submitted to the Mystery Hunt subreddit.

Right now, the viewership of my blog is almost entirely decided by whether I
share it outside Facebook, and whether it gets traction outside Facebook.

By my standards of quality, my best posts are Grad School Thoughs, AlphaGo,
and A Gentle Introduction to SEcure Computation. They also happen to be three
of my four most recent posts (not counting this one.)



