---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 3 - Asynchronous Research in Puzzle Hunts"
date:   2016-05-03 23:22:00 -0700
---

Last Sunday, I did Berkeley Mystery Hunt. I can't talk about the puzzles
publicly because this puzzle hunt gets run twice: once during the school
year for Berkeley students, and once during the summer for people in the
Bay Area.

In every puzzle hunt, I run into the same scenario. A new puzzle comes out,
and I take a look at it. I'll solve it, or I'll get stuck and move to
anotoher puzzle. Either way, I run into a problem. Either I need other
people to explain what they've figured out, or other people need to
understand my progress based on my work so far.

For smaller puzzle hunts, this is fine. Usually you're all in the same
room, so you can ask each other in person. However, when you scale
up to massive teams like MIT Mystery Hunt, this becomes a huge
concern. They might be sleeping, or be on the other side of the country,
and you have to figure out the partial progress from only the notes they've
written down.

I didn't know what to call this, until I read qntm's stories about
antimemetics. If you haven't read them, I highly, highly recommend checking
them out. Start at [We Need To Talk About Fifty-Five](http://www.scp-wiki.net/we-need-to-talk-about-fifty-five)
and follow the links from there.

If you don't want to, here's the quick version. Memes are ideas that
want to be known, spreading from mind to mind. Antimemes are ideas that
want to be forgotten. They are self-censoring. When you stop looking at
an antimemetic object, your brain erases your memory and you forget
it even exists.

The Antimemetics Division studies antimemes, and
they have a devil of a time doing so. It's hard to study things that
everyone rediscovers on a daily basis, and it's even harder when
malicious antimemes erase the lives of coworkers so thoroughly that
any evidence of their existence disappears. It's one of the more
horrifying ways to go. You can't prove your existence to the world
if the world doesn't listen to you...

Nightmare fuel aside

