---
layout: post
title:  "Cenozoic Park"
date:   2016-07-10 16:14:00 -0700
---

For once, Sean is happy on a Monday morning.

It's hard for Sean to get happy on Mondays. He works in one of the basement
labs at ExGen's headquarters. There are no windows. The ceiling lights are stuck
at a perpetual pale yellow. It's a perfect storm for destroying Circadian rhythms,
and the hours can be long and dreary.
Yes, he gets to work at the frontier of genetics
research, but it's hard work, and with such a homogenous architecture it's
very easy for a dinosaur to lose track of the time.

Sean is a stegosaurus. He stands at 2.5 meters tall, 8.5 meters long. He's
pretty sure his plates are still good. The doctor said they were at his last
physical, right before he went to college. That would be...just over six
years ago.

He's happy because today is his 1-year anniversary at ExGen. It's symbolic, but
frankly he doesn't care about company loyalty or what have you.
Sean cares because now that he's worked for a year, he's allowed to interact
with the humans directly.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

The story is a simple one.

A long time ago, an expedition to the South Pole discovered a group of
remarkably well preserved humans. Most human skeletons found were charred,
irradiated, and decomposed almost beyond identification. This - this was a
gold mine for anthropology.

With great care, the researchers extracted several tissue samples. By analyzing
them, they greatly improved their understanding of human biology.
And then the ethics questions began.

"Why don't we bring them back? Human artifacts accelerated our technology curve.
We owe it to them."

"Why should we bring back a species that caused its own extinction? The humans
you want to thank died long ago. Leave your sentiments at the door, it's a
gross waste of resources."

"Going to the South Pole was a gross waste of resources too. So was recreating
the Apollo 11 capsule. But we did it anyways, for the same reasons as them, and
several centuries ahead of schedule. You know why? Because they made mistakes
that we didn't have to. *We owe them.*"

The debate was heated, but eventually the community came to a consensus. Bring
them back. A small community, no more, then see where it goes.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

(The above setup is bad.)

(The better approach is to go from the human perspective. Because if you're following
the dinosaur POV, you're making the dinosaur side more sympathetic. It'll be
more thought provoking (LOL AS IF) if you go from the side of the group in
captivity.)

Potential ideas:
    - Captive humans complain about tokenism
    - Argument that humans wouldn't exist without dinosaurs
        - "We took the Earth from them."
    - Imply human-level extinction event.
    - Inspired by The Crash - prior knowledge used to bootstrap dinosaur development
    - Holding sentient beings captive vs being the reason those beings exist
    at all

"Hey. Hey! Hey everybody! New guy out of the lab!"

A man groggily opens his eyes. He looks up at the ceiling. It's made of
glass. The sun is shining bright, refracting into dazzling patterns on the dirt floor.
He hears footsteps.

"Hey. It's been a while since anyone new showed up. What's your name."

"It's...Fred. I'm Fred. Ugh, what a headache..."

Fred's eyes refocus. He sees a group of people standing in front of him. He does
a quick headcount. One, two, three, four...four others. A woman stands at the
front, dressed in a shawl of leaves and twine.

"Yeah. They make sure you're knocked out before transport, and the side effects
are a bitch. Should wear off in a few minutes."

He hears the words, and they're too loud. Fred raises a hand, the universal gesture
for "give me a minute". Then he speaks. "Anesthetic. Right, Sean mentioned
something like that before I got shipped off. <ORIGINAL EXCUSE HERE>"

"Sean. That was the dinosaur in charge of your development?"

"Yeah. Sean was a stegosauraus. Two-and-a-half meters tall, eight-and-a-half
meters long. InGen hired him straight out of his PhD."

The woman whistles. "Stegosauraus. Lucky bastard. What'd he like to talk about?"

"Mostly day to day things. And marvelling at all the money he was
earning, now that he wasn't a grad student."

"I had a raptor in charge of me,
and let me tell you, it's exactly what you'd believe. Nasty, cutthroat politics.
When he was talking to me to help develop my language centers, he mostly talked
about all the plays people were making against him, and the ways he was trying
to defend against it. Eventually I had to tell him to figure out a different
conversation topic. Hearing about all the times he thought I was going to get
terminated because of funding issues wasn't great for my psyche. Oh! But where
are my manners! I'm Cassandra. Behind me is Jordan. He's Dave, she's Dorothy."

They shake hands. "Well, I'll remember all those names for ten minutes at best."

Jordan laughs. "You'll pick it up. This is your home now."

Fred stops. "And where, exactly, is home?"

A loud screech from a speaker above him answers for him.

**"The park is now open. Welcome, to Cenozoic Park."**

\*\*\*
