---
layout: post
title:  "Primes, Pi, and Riemann Zeta, Oh My!"
date:   2016-03-21 16:56:00 -0700
---

I've been working on drafts for other blog posts, but they've been
trickier than expected. I feel bad about not updating this blog
enough, so I decided to "relax" with a recreational math post.

As a disclaimer, I am not a math major. My math education
stopped at real analysis. I'm targeting this towards
the high school math contest audience. That means I won't assume anything
past calculus, but I will assume many things before calculus, and I
also assume people reading this will look up unfamiliar terms on their own.


Relatively Prime Random Numbers
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Let $$a$$ and $$b$$ be two uniformly random natural numbers.
What is the probability $$a$$ and $$b$$ are relatively prime?

First off, this problem isn't well formed. Although you can define
a uniform distribution over the real numbers, you can't do one
over the naturals because probability theory breaks down.
(See [here](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/997173/can-you-pick-a-random-natural-number-and-a-random-real-number)
for an explanation.)
To make this formal, we should really be picking $$a,b$$ from
$$1$$ to $$N$$, and ask what the probability converges to.


> Let $$P(n)$$ be the probability that two uniformly random
> natural numberes from $$1$$ to $$n$$ (inclusive) are relatively prime.
> What is $$P(\infty) = \lim_{n\to\infty} P(n)$$?

The first solution to this is credited to Dirichlet. To make the proof cleaner,
I'm going to handwave the limit when arguing how random natural
numbers act.

Two numbers $$a,b$$ are relatively prime if they share
no common factors. This is true if and only if for every prime $$p$$,
at most one of $$a,b$$ is divisible
by $$p$$. Equivalently, $$a$$ and $$b$$ are not both divisible by $$p$$.

Since we pick uniformly at random, the probability $$p$$ divides
a random number is $$1/p$$. The probabillity both
numbers are divisible by $$p$$ is $$1/p^2$$, giving the following.

$$
    P(\infty) = \left(1 - \frac{1}{2^2}\right)
                \left(1 - \frac{1}{3^2}\right)
                \left(1 - \frac{1}{5^2}\right)\cdots
              = \prod_{p\text{ prime}} \left(1 - \frac{1}{p^2}\right)
$$

Now, here's where you apply a neat trick - take the reciprocal
of both sides.

$$
    \frac{1}{P(\infty)}
    = \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{2^2}}\cdot
      \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{3^2}}\cdot
      \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{5^2}}\cdots
$$

For each fraction, substitute the infinite series $$\frac{1}{1-r} = 1 + r + r^2 + \cdots$$.

$$
    \frac{1}{P(\infty)}
    = \prod_{p\text{ prime}} \left(
        1 + \frac{1}{p^2} + \frac{1}{p^4} + \frac{1}{p^6} + \cdots
    \right)
$$

I claim the right hand side is the same as

$$
    \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^2}
$$

The argument follows from a clever factoring argument.
Suppose we expanded out the product of the infinite series.
We would get infinitely many terms, where each term is generated
by choosing one term from every infinite series and multiplying them.
For example, one term uses $$1/2^2$$ from the $$p = 2$$ series,
$$1/3^2$$ from the $$p = 3$$ series, and $$1$$ from the rest.
That term would be

$$
    \frac{1}{2^2\cdot 3^2} = \frac{1}{6^2}
$$

Another term uses $$1/2^4$$ from the $$2$$ series,
$$1$$ from the $$3$$ series, $$1/5^2$$ from the $$5$$ series, and
$$1$$ from the rest. That gives

$$
    \frac{1}{2^4 \cdot 5^2} = \frac{1}{(2^2 \cdot 5)^2} = \frac{1}{20^2}
$$

Now, consider the general term $$1/n^2$$. We can find the corresponding
term in the product's expansion. For every prime
$$p_i$$, find the largest power $$p_i^{k_i}$$ that divides $$n$$.
($$k_i$$ could be $$0$$.) Then, for series corresponding to $$p_i$$,
use $$1/p^{2k_i}$$ from that series.
The product is

$$
    \prod_{p\text{ prime}} \frac{1}{p^{2k_i}} = \frac{1}{\left(\prod_{p\text{ prime}} p^{k_i}\right)^2} = \frac{1}{n^2}
$$

Every natural number has a unique prime factorization. So, every number
$$n$$ is generated once and exactly once.
Thus, when the product

$$
    \prod_{p\text{ prime}} \left(
        1 + \frac{1}{p^2} + \frac{1}{p^4} + \frac{1}{p^6} + \cdots
    \right)
$$

is expanded, we get the sum of the reciprocal of the squares.

(If you're like me, you may want to spend a moment admiring this argument.
This is a contender for my favorite proof ever.)

The final expression is

$$
    \frac{1}{P(\infty)} = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^2}
$$

Substituting

$$
    \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^2} = \frac{\pi^2}{6}
$$

gives the final answer of $$6/\pi^2 \approx 0.608$$.


Riemann Zeta With Copious Handwaving
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, unless you've seen it before, it should not be clear why

$$
    \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^2} = \frac{\pi^2}{6}
$$

This was first proved by Euler in 1734 by sketchy proof methods, and it took
a few years to make the proof rigorous. Nevertheless, I'm presenting the
sketchy proof.

To prove this is true, we're going to use the Taylor series expansion for
$$\sin(x)$$. For all $$x$$, the sine can be written as

$$
    \sin(x) = x - \frac{x^3}{3!} + \frac{x^5}{5!} - \cdots
$$

Divide through by $$x$$ to get

$$
    \frac{\sin(x)}{x} = 1 - \frac{x^2}{3!} + \frac{x^4}{5!} - \cdots
$$

(If you don't know what Taylor series are, take this on faith, it's not worth
explaining in this post.)

The idea Euler used was to treat $$\sin$$ as an infinite degree polynomial.
Any polynomial $$p(x)$$ with roots $$r_1,\ldots, r_n$$ can be written as

$$
    p(x) = a(x-r_1)(x-r_2)\cdots(x-r_n)
$$

where $$a$$ is some constant. But for this proof, we're using a different
form. Divide each term by $$-r_i$$ to get

$$
    p\left(x\right) = a'\left(1 - \frac{x}{r_1}\right)\left(1 - \frac{x}{r_2}\right)\cdots\left(1-\frac{x}{r_n}\right)
$$

where again, $$a'$$ is some constant.
Assuming this works for functions with infinitely many roots, note
$$\sin(x)/x = 0$$
at $$x = \pm \pi, \pm 2\pi, \pm 3\pi, \ldots$$.

$$
    \frac{\sin(x)}{x} = a'\left(1-\frac{x}{\pi}\right)\left(1+\frac{x}{\pi}\right)\left(1-\frac{x}{2\pi}\right)\left(1+\frac{x}{2\pi}\right)\cdots
$$

To make the constant term match up, $$a' = 1$$.
(Try converting this to the $$a(x-r_1)(x-r_2)\cdots$$ form and
you'll see why this proof is sketchy.)

By grouping up terms, we get

$$
    \frac{\sin(x)}{x} = \left(1-\frac{x^2}{\pi^2}\right)\left(1-\frac{x^2}{4\pi^2}\right)\left(1-\frac{x^2}{9\pi^2}\right)\cdots
$$

Now, compare the coefficient of $$x^2$$ from this product to the coefficient
in the Taylor series. To get $$x^2$$, we have to choose $$x^2/(n^2\pi^2)$$
exactly once, and choose $$1$$ from the rest. This gives

$$
    -\frac{1}{3!}x^2 = \sum_{n=1}^\infty -\frac{x^2}{n^2\pi^2}
$$

Which gives the final answer of

$$
   \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^2} = \frac{\pi^2}{6}
$$

MOTIVATION HERE

This sum of reciprocals is a specific case of the [Riemann zeta function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riemann_zeta_function),
defined as

$$
    \zeta(s) = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{1}{n^s}
$$

It turns out that studying this function for varying $$s$$ has deep connections
to number theory. I don't know analytic number theory (or analysis, really), so
I can't explain why that's true. But if you consider that we started with
relatively prime numbers and got to sums of reciprocals of squares, I think
it's reasonable to believe there is something going on here.


Pi by Prime Products
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Finally, I'll close with a fun identity that relates the prime numbers to $$\pi$$.
Every odd prime $$p$$ is either $$1 \text{ mod } 4$$ or $$3 \text{ mod } 4$$. Take the
negative reciprocal if it's $$1 \text{ mod } 4$$ and the positive reciprocal if it's
$$3 \text{ mod } 4$$. Add $$1$$, take the product over all primes, and you get

$$
    \frac{4}{\pi} = \left(1+\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(1-\frac{1}{5}\right)\left(1+\frac{1}{7}\right)\left(1+\frac{1}{11}\right)\cdots
$$

CITE http://www.cut-the-knot.org/proofs/AfterEulerProduct.shtml

The proof for this is going to borrow elements from both previous
sections. First, take the reciprocal.

$$
    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{3}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1-\frac{1}{5}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{7}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{11}}
$$

Again, replace each term with an infinite series

$$
    \prod_{p \equiv 1 \text{ mod }4} \left(1 +\frac{1}{p} + \frac{1}{p^2}+\cdots\right)
    \prod_{p \equiv 3 \text{ mod }4} \left(1 - \frac{1}{p} + \frac{1}{p^2}-\cdots\right)
$$

And again, expand out this infinite product. Ignoring the signs, this is
exactly the same as the relatively prime product, except it doesn't have
an infinite series for $$2$$. Expanding this product will give every odd
number.

Now, consider the sign. When designed this way, a term $$1/n$$ is positive if
$$n$$ is the product of an even number of $$3\text{ mod } 4$$ primes.
(They don't have to be distinct, the even powers automatically get a
+ sign in the infinite series.) The term is negative otherwise.

If you multiply an even number of $$3\text{ mod }4$$ primes, you
get $$3^{2k} \equiv 9^k \equiv 1 \text{ mod } 4$$. If you multiply
an odd number of those primes, you get $$3 \text{ mod } 4$$. So,
the sign is negative at every other odd number, and the product
expands to

$$
    1 - \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{5} - \frac{1}{7} + \frac{1}{9} - \cdots
$$

Out comes the [Leibniz formula for $$\pi$$](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leibniz_formula_for_%CF%80), derivable
by Taylor series on $$\arctan(1)$$.

$$
    \frac{\pi}{4} =
    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{3}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1-\frac{1}{5}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{7}}\cdot
                    \frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{11}}
$$

$$
    \frac{4}{\pi} = \left(1+\frac{1}{3}\right)\left(1-\frac{1}{5}\right)\left(1+\frac{1}{7}\right)\left(1+\frac{1}{11}\right)\cdots
$$

(I love this factoring trick so much. It's great, even if it's difficult
to apply on other problems.)


Oh My! That's All, Folks!
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

That's all I've got. Hope you liked this math diversion, and less
mathy content is coming soon. If plans work out properly. We'll see.
