---
layout: post
title:  "How I View Politicians"
date:   2016-10-22 15:54:00 -0700
---

I'm not sure why you're here to get political opinions. I'm incredibly
underqualified to discuss anything about politics.

On the other hand, lots of people are underqualified, and that doesn't stop
the flame wars on the Internet. And what, my understanding of politics is going
to get better if I avoid thinking about it? That's literally the opposite
of what you should be doing if you want to understand politics.

So here's how this post is going to go. I explain how I view politics and
politicians. And that's it. No followup. I wait for people to object to the
stupider things I say, and think about it.

Is this going to make me a politicial genius? No. Am I looking to become
a political genius? No. I'm looking to be less of a political idiot.
Broaden my horizons a bit, see what happens.

Here we go.

The Two Rules
===========================================================

I have two golden rules about politics.

1. Politicians are motivated by two desires: power for the sake of power, and
power for the sake of making the world a better place.
2. No one gets everything they want. Therefore, politics turns into a game
of compromise and quid pro quo.

Let's break it down.

The Power to Change the World
-----------------------------------------------------------

All politicians want power. I don't think this is a controversial claim.
Try saying the reverse. "Some politicians don't want power." I have trouble
thinking of a politician that statement could apply to.

The question, then, is what they want power for. Some people want power for
the feeling of dominance over others. The vaguely euphoric feeling they get,
when they tell people what to do, and it *gets done.*

> Power is my mistress. I have worked too hard at her conquest to allow anyone
> to take her away from me.

(Napoleon)
{: .centered }

I know some political scientists claim that having power is the **only**
desire of politicians. That's not entirely wrong, and it's also not entirely
true. If someone just wanted power, they'd probably have an easier time in
the private sector. (I'll freely admit that's purely my intuition.)

That leads to the second part of the rule. When I look at a politician, I see
somebody who believes world order is broken. When someone runs for office,
their entire thesis is that they'd be a better leader than the current one.
So of course they want power - the people in power are doing it wrong!

To place it in narrative terms, it's the difference between a hero who
became a hero for fame, and a hero who became a hero because they believed
no one else was going to rise to the occasion.

It's somewhat icky to admit out loud, but sometimes the first step to improving
the world is an aggressive grab for power. If you have influence, it makes it
much easier to convince people to act the way you think they ought to.

And this should go without saying, but all politicians are genuinely trying
to make the world a better place. Including the ones that disagree with you.
Politicians aren't trolls. They don't disagree with you solely to piss you
off. They disagree with you because they disagree with you on what a better
world should look like.

That being said, how important this desire to do good is comes down to the
politician and the level of office their running for.
Someone running for town mayor is more likely to care about helping people.
Someone running for senator is closer towards the end of wanting more power.
Someone running for President almost certainly has power as their primary goal.
Only a very, very arrogant sort of person would look at the Presidency,
look at the incredible stress is causes, consider the increased odds of death
by assassination, understand that a large part of the world is going to hate
them with undying passion, and conclude that yeah, they actually want to be
President, and they'd be a good leader for the United freaking States
of America.

Even the most cynical interpretation of politics doesn't sound that bad to
me. When I was doing an internship two years ago, the city mayor visited our
office, to talk about the role of technology in government.
During the Q&A session, an audience member asked how politicians could justify
switching positions so often. The mayor said that of course politicians are
going to switch positions to match what votes want to do. Otherwise, they
wouldn't be doing a good job of representing their constituents.

I saw his reply as a positive spin on the following idea: *politicians motivated
by power have to follow the voters, because that's the metric they
get judged by.* Take Obama's approach to terrorism.
In an interview with The Atlantic, he said that people get
much more scared of terrorism than they should. He'd prefer devoting his
time to forming stronger relationships with Asia, because that's much more
important for the future of the US. (check this.) But, he couldn't be seen as
soft on terror, and so he had to spend more time on the Middle East than he
wanted to.

If you agree with Obama, then the state of things kinda sucks. On the flip side,
votes also force self-motivated politicians who disagree with you to act as
if they did agree with you.
If a majority of the country agrees that interracial marriage should be legal,
and a politician says they don't approve of it, they're going to lose their
next election. That's it. No way out. And therefore every politician agrees
that interracial marriage is okay, despite the fact that as recently as
2013, (CITE) 13% of Americans did not approve of marriage between blacks and
whites.

At some point, there's no difference between pandering to racists and being a
racist. And similarly, at some point there's no difference between pandering
to equal rights and believing in equal rights.

*Votes are the means by which the public keeps a politician's desire for power
aligned with the public's interests.* Unfortunately, what's best for the
nation isn't always what the nation wants, but it's the world we live in.
Someone who doesn't pander for votes is going to lose their election to someone
who does. And remember, the whole reason people go into politics is because
they believe they'll do a better job than everyone else running. So yes,
politicians do things for show and flair rather than substance, because they
have to.

It does bother me that politicians may be saying things they don't believe
in, but considering all the upsides of democracy, I'm not too upset about the
current state of affairs.


"You Got More Than You Gave. And I Wanted What I Got."
====================================================================

Take a bunch of people, all interested in advancing their own agenda. Then
throw them into a room, and tell them they have to agree on something.

That's what Congress feels like to me. Hence, the second rule of politics:
no one gets everything they want.

The President has a lot of power, but the President isn't a dictator.
Similarly, a Congressman or Congresswoman is just one person in a vast
bureaucracy. Governments are huge systems of incredible complexity.
All things considered, it's suprising they actually work.

To advance their pet issues, politicians have to balance their personal
convictions with the realities of their situation. People who stick to their
guns and refuse to make concessions tend not to get anything done.

That's not saying stubbornness doesn't have its place. Weaponized stubbornness
can be a powerful tool. Take Congress in the Obama adminstration.
I didn't follow politics very closely, because who's got time for that?
The broad narrative I got from my decidedly Democratic bubble was that
Republicans were blocking Democratic legislation by being obstinate.

If you ally yourself with the blue tribe, sure, that sucks. But think about the
broader picture. Republicans stall the legislative process, making voters
disillusioned by Democratic leadership. That gives ammunition for Republicans
to use in upcoming midterm elections. The Democrats know the clock is ticking
on this power play, so they now have two options. Make bigger concessions to
get their bills through, or gamble that painting Republicans as do-nothings will
be enough to maintain voter approval.

Which move was right? Were there other moves? I don't know.
The point is that politics is messy. It's filled with backroom
deals and lobbyists, and it's all a part of the game.

You can try to rise above the game, proclaiming that governments should hold
themselves to higher ideals. Then you lose to the people who accepted money
from lobbyists.

Politicians have to learn how to navigate this mess, or else they're not
the leader they promised voters they were going to be.

That means quid pro quo. It means compromise. Advocating for something
they don't believe in, because they were promised support for the bill they
care about. Accepting money from lobbyists even if they don't want to,
because they're stuck in a political prisoner's dilemna. Over time, politicians
become exactly the kind of person they hated as a politically aware
teenager.

In short, politics is where ideals go to die.

The great politicians are not the ones with the strongest ideals. The great
politicians are the ones that dove into the system with disgust, and rose
out of the mess with the bill they wanted to pass.


What Guides my Vote?
==========================================================

Given this lens, what makes me decide I should vote for a specific politician?

As a primary goal, I support politicians who publically support causes that
match my belief. They could be lying, but guessing what they believe behind
their claims is a road towards madness. And if they don't actually believe
in their cause, who cares? They have to support it to get votes, and if they
didn't try after getting elected, they're not getting my vote again. Good
is input-independent.

As a secondary goal, I support politicians who look like they'll actually get things
done. I'm much fonder of proposals that push the status quo by a bit instead of
a lot, because the former are much more likely to actually happen. It's already
hard enough to pass a bill.

As another secondary goal, I support politicians that are willing to change
their mind, especially about key issues for them. Politicians are trying to
make the world a better place. Having the self-awareness to ask for council
is a big plus. Actually changing their mind about an issue because of that
council is a bigger one. (This is why I've never been particularly bothered
by people trying to dig up voting records from 10 years ago. That doesn't
matter. What matters is their most recent voting record. The further into
the past you dig, the less relevant that information is for the present day.)

