---
layout: post
title:  "So There I Was, Buying My Little Pony Merchandise in Italy"
date:   2017-12-28 00:30:00 -0700
---

For Thanksgiving, my family went on a trip to Rome. It was pretty cool!
There's something special about visting a city that is literally
thousands of years old. It is one thing to read about the Renaissance,
and it is another thing entirely to see a sculpted fountain in person,
realizing that it predates the Declaration of Independence by over
300 years, and it's *right there*. The one downside is that although
my parents liked the scenery, they were not the biggest fans of
Italian food. They didn't dislike it, but, well, let me put it this way:
the only restaurant we visited multiple times was a Chinese restaurant.

To be fair, the Chinese restaurant catered to Chinese exchange students,
meaning their Chinese food was authentic and actually pretty good.
Still, the whole time, I was trying to figure out why we were eating
Chinese food in Rome.

But I digress! During the trip, we visited a supermarket to buy some
fruit. While there, a family member pointed out a box carrying
My Little Pony characters.

PICTURE

I wasn't planning to buy it. They argued the following.

* According to the packaging, there was "a surprise" inside.
* It would be a really funny souvineir.
* It only cost 2 Euros.

I ended up buying two boxes.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Fast forward a few weeks, and I figured I should open one of these
up.

Now, for the record, I was initially opposed to buying it because
the characters art wasn't show-accurate. Rainbow's mane doesn't
look like that! Since when has Fluttershy winked like that, or
Twilight smirked like that? *Literally unbuyable.*

Then I remembered that there was a MLP movie, which was animated
differently. It might have been *movie accurate*. Rainbow Dash
in particular is closer to her movie model than her show model.

PICTURE

Mollified, I opened up the box. Inside was this.

PICTURE

What looked like a chocolate muffin, and a few pony cards. The
chocolate muffin...was not that good. Derpy would be ashamed.
But, I wasn't expecting it to be that great.

Let's take a look at these cards.

PICTURE

Awwwwww, they're so cute! But wait a second, there's only 5
cards. Isn't it supposed to be the Mane 6? Where's Applejack?

Speaking of which, is Applejack even on the box?

VIDEO

*She isn't.*

PICTURE OF APPLEJACK?

Applejack certainly isn't a very popular character, but come on,
she's part of the Mane 6! Is she really so unmarketable? Did the
design people forget to include her?
