---
layout: post
title:  "MIT Mystery Hunt 2017"
date:   2016-01-03 23:14:00 -0800
---

When ✈✈✈ Galactic Trendsetters ✈✈✈ did introductions this year, I realized with
some surprise that this was my 5th time solving Mystery Hunt. Second time
flying in. Now that I'm a Real Adult with a Real Job, it's harder to justify
taking a few days off, but after five years I've hit a critical mass of both
MIT people I know and puzzle people I know.

If you want to avoid spoilers, you should stop reading now.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Let's get some elephants out of the room first.

Was Hunt shorter than Setec Astronomy expected? Yes, absolutely.

Was having a short Hunt a bad thing? I'm not so sure. *WHOOSH* Galactic
Trendsetters *NIERRRRR* got 4th this year, which is a lot better than before.
From what I heard, the team got bigger, people got better at looking at metas
early, and the metas were easier to solve than previous years. Combined,
that meant we finished by midday Saturday. It turns out you can do
things on MLK weekend besides solve puzzles. I played some board games,
had a nice dinner, and got to work on Facebook Hacker Cup Round 1 at a reasonable
time, instead of 4 AM.

I place no blame at all on Setec for a short Hunt. Look, time estimation is hard. (I
should know, I contributed to the Sages hunt.) The themeing was on point. The opening
skit was great, the flavor was baked in all over the place, and overall it was
one of my favorite Hunts. I just wish it was a bit longer...

Yes, I can see how a short Hunt could be disappointing. Some people on our team arrived
Saturday morning, and by that point we only had two metapuzzles left.
On the flip side, running out of puzzles is a competitive team problem.
There were several teams who got to finish Hunt for the first
time, and that's really awesome.

I think it comes down to how much you were here for puzzles, and how much you
were here for hanging out with people for puzzles. I came for a bit of both,
and I got a bit of both, so I'm satisfied.

Setec wrote good puzzles. In fact, in some ways they were almost too good.
To me, getting good at puzzles is less about noticing the trick, and more about
learning how to solve from 60% of the data, 10% of which might be wrong.
Hunts get longer when you have to figure out incredibly obtuse extraction
mechanisms, and we didn't hit as many of those this year.

The metas were clued very well, which made them easier
to solve. That led to more backsolving constraints, which made it easier
to solve puzzles. That sped up the unlocking process, and it all cascades
from there. At some point we had three Quest rounds open with zero solves in
each, just because we'd been solving metas and Character puzzles so quickly.
The Chemist meta and Cleric meta were especially open to backsolving, and because
character levels were the main unlock mechanism, we backsolved those very
aggressively. (A bit too aggressively in fact. HQ got mad at us and didn't
confirm one of our Cleric backsolves for an hour. We're sorry!)

I did like that the unlock mechanism was very clear. It made it easy to
decide which puzzles to prioritize. We never would have done the scavenger
hunt if people hadn't insisted we unlock Wizard level 6. I didn't work on it
myself, but it led to a scroll with calligraphy, Elvish, and the first 150 words
of The Bee Movie, which was a glorious sight.

PICTURE

Puzzle-wise, not too many puzzles stuck in my mind, just because they went by
so fast. There are also some pretty good solvers on the team, meaning there were
very few puzzles where I was around from start to finish.

The first puzzle I was around all the way for was China Kilns. The trick was
really cute. We derped on assigning clues to answers properly, then we derped on
solving the clue phrase, then we solved it.

By the time I looked at A Message From Our Sponsors, everything was IDed. Someone
else got the a-ha. My main contribution was verifying that the
Poinsettia Bowl was indeed a thing and we had to be on the right track.

When Pentoku came out, I loudly announced I wanted to work on a logic puzzle and
people were free to join me. Then I left because about seven people started
crowding around a blackboard.
Between the entire team, I'm pretty sure we solved each Pentoku twice, just because
of communication issues between people in different rooms and remote solvers.

I helped arrange the clues for A Lengthy Journey. This was shortly after
we solved China Kilns, so I was thinking we needed to make the answers form
a cycle (each answer disambiguates a different clue.) We never
realized that wasn't what we were supposed to do. It's one of the 9 puzzles we never solved.

Fashionable Friends wasn't an immediately obvious My Little Pony puzzle, so I
overlooked it. Someone pinged me about it later because it got stuck on
extraction. I unblocked it immediately, because of *course* cutie marks are
going to be important in an MLP puzzle. I mean, DUH, this happened last year
too. I'm not sure whether to be proud or to quietly question why part of my life revolves around cartoon
horses.
