---
layout: post
title:  "Two Years Later"
date:   2017-08-18 02:13:00 -0700
---

I'll be honest: I completely forgot to prepare a post for my two year
blogging anniversary until today. (I'm vaguely disgusted that "two year
blogging anniversary" is a valid English phrase, but sometimes languages
are silly like that.)

Ironically this is because I've been working on a larger post that's been
taking up most of my writing time. Hopefully I get that done soon.

I do feel I've been less productive this year than last year, blogging wise.
Let's see if that's backed up empirically. Now, word count is a pretty bad
metric for writing time, because in my experience most of writing is rewriting.
But it's the best metrics I've got. Here's a list of all posts I wrote this
year, along with their word count.

```
 1244 2016-09-07-contradictions.markdown  
 1936 2016-10-18-politics.markdown  
 1750 2016-11-08-right-questions.markdown  
  895 2016-11-12-hybrid-argument.markdown  
 1384 2017-01-20-mh-2017.markdown  
  931 2017-01-25-research-comm.markdown  
  592 2017-02-12-default-arguments.markdown  
 4035 2017-02-22-wasserstein-gan.markdown  
 1827 2017-03-18-we-have-a-problem.markdown  
  834 2017-04-19-acss.markdown  
 1925 2017-04-26-perils-batch-norm.markdown  
 3443 2017-06-27-hyperparam-spectral.markdown  
 1613 2017-08-12-openai-dota-2.markdown  
22409 total  
```

Here's the same list for last year.

```
  542 2015-08-20-things-i-did-in-my-khan-academy-internship.markdown  
 1744 2015-08-23-simulating-a-biased-coin-with-a-fair-one.markdown  
 2592 2015-08-25-perfectly-intelligent-mafia.markdown  
  599 2015-09-01-optimizing-process.markdown  
 1580 2015-09-09-the-other-two-envelope-problem.markdown  
 1988 2015-09-24-how-an-audio-play-about-a-time-traveling-pony-turned-me-into-a-fanboy.markdown  
 1703 2015-10-11-humor-proposal.markdown  
 1871 2015-11-02-friendship-games-geometry.markdown  
  465 2015-11-29-mlp-season-5-review.markdown  
 6376 2016-01-03-grad-school.markdown  
 1231 2016-01-20-mysteryhunt.markdown  
 1784 2016-01-27-deepmind-go.markdown  
 3101 2016-02-11-secure-computation.markdown  
 2647 2016-02-20-half-year.markdown  
 4537 2016-03-17-alphago-lsd.markdown  
 1353 2016-03-22-primes-pi.markdown  
 1323 2016-06-13-hillary-google.markdown  
  817 2016-07-03-email-time.markdown  
  714 2016-07-04-fruit.markdown  
 1361 2016-07-17-ml-sleep.markdown  
 1016 2016-08-03-pokemon-go-equality.markdown  
39344 total  
```

So, I wrote around 17,000 fewer words this year. What changed?

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

The most important change is that I'm been working full time the entire year.
It's been a lot harder for me to get side projects done than it was in college.
This is a well-known experience with well-known explanations, but let me explain
anyways.

In college, I didn't have designated work times. I went to class, I had lunch
and dinner, and the rest of the day was a blend between work and free time.
It was very easy for me to work for 20 minutes, switch to playing *Dustforce*
for 40 minutes, blog for 10 minutes, flowing back and forth depending on mood until 3 AM.
Then I would wake up the next morning and start the process over again.

It was even easier for me to do this because I didn't have many group projects,
and I had very few homework groups or study groups. Overall there was no
accountability on my schedule, and the blending was a natural consequence of that.

This wasn't a bad thing. I wasn't very focused, but at any time there was a chance
I could switch to being productive, and the activation barrier between everything
was much lower. Blogging slotted itself very naturally into my day. (Well, more
like into my night.)

All that has changed. I have meetings, coworkers, managers. I'm working on a
project with collaborators across three offices.
Coordination is a lot easier if everybody's working times overlap - one of my
collaborators works frmo London, and he's deliberately shifted his schedule
forward because the only good meeting time is his evenings (which are our
mornings in California.)

It's the same problem that most companies have, and it homogenizes the schedule
into the same "working hours". When I was a student, I worked more, but the
work was spread out over the entire week like a big morass. Sure, sometimes I
didn't finish work until 2 AM. But I had relaxed enough during the afternoon
to make this feel okay.

In a job, all the work gets compressed into a single block, the time where
everyone agrees they can get in to work. I do take breaks, and I'm lucky enough
to work at a company where I don't a capped break time, but in practice there's
always a nagging feeling to get my work done so that I can leave the office.

The end result is that all my energy and motivation gets spent at work in one
big burst, and by the time I get home it's hard to do much more than browse
the Internet and play games. The time it takes to context switch into anything
productive is much bigger, and for me, writing falls into the "productive"
bucket.

I've thought a bit about whether I can reproduce the college working schedule,
so to speak, but there are benefits to working similar hours to everybody else.
Overall I don't think there's a lot of value in changing how I work.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Okay, time for more uplifting news! In [last year's post]({% post_url 2017-08-18-one-year %}),
I mentioned a few posts I said I would write this year! Let's see how I did.

> The post about *Gunnerkrigg Court* is going to happen. I swear it will.

Uhhhh, that post didn't happen. Okay, next!

> I wrote the start of a really, really stupid short story about dinosaurs. [...]
> I hope that story sees the light of day, because the premise is so stupid
> that it might just wrap back around to brilliant.

That one didn't happen either. Uhhh, alright, what else did I say I was
going to work on.

Oh, I said I was going to write a post about AI safety! That one is in progress!
And not done! A bit far from done, in fact, but let's round that up to a win.
If failure is success rounded down, then surely success is failure rounded up.

To be serious for a bit: yes, I am a bit disappointed I haven't written posts
that I've wanted to write for over a year. But I'm not actually that
disappointed - it feels like I'm spent about as much time writing as I want to
spend. Well, maybe I've written a bit less than I wanted to.

Let's say I'm slightly more at peace and leave it at that.

In terms of life trajectory: I skipped applying to PhD programs because I was
a bit lazy, I can still do the research I want to do in my current job, and I'm
getting paid.

I think I've changed less this year compared to last year. Again, I hear this
is common. It's very easy to drastically change every year of college. It's
much harder to do so when you leave that environment.

When I think about what I would regret the most, it's something like this: the
worry that five years from now, I'll look back on my life, and have no idea
where five years of my life went. Something kind of like this.

> Apple Bloom has sunk into a psychotic depression, because she knows this is how
> it all starts. Pretty soon they'll all be living in different cities, and they'll
> only see each other at New Year's. [...] Sure, they'll start talking about things
> they did back in the day, like "Oh hey, rememeber that time we were happy and
> life felt like it had meaning?" And after a few drinks, it'll feel like there's
> still a connection between them, and they'll share all their online handles
> and say they should get together somtime. [...] Then the next day when they sober up,
> they'll get right back to never getting around to it.

([Totally Legit Recap, "On Your Marks". Warning: NSFW humor about *My Little Pony*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5av-M97Kjic&feature=youtu.be&t=1m52s).)
{: .centered }

It's that worry that pushes me to try to do things, even when I have reasons
not to.

Will pre-emptively thinking about [quarter-life crises](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quarter-life_crisis)
stop me from having a quarter-life crisis? Eh, maybe. Again, we'll find out.

I think I've rambled long enough. Two years down, and here's to two more.
