"Hey. Hey! Wake up! We have a problem."

"What, what, I'm up. What's the problem?"

"Bad. Really bad. We're characters in meta-fiction."

"Um. Okay?"

"No. No you don't understand. We're *self-aware*. We know we're
in a story. And that means we need to develop personalities very quickly,
or else the writer's going to get *bored*. And we won't even see it
coming. We'll just...stop."

"Oh shit you're right. Okay, uh, I'm...Joe? Yes Joe. And I like coffee.
And-"

"I don't think this is helping."

"I don't think it's helping either. Shit, okay, the story's still going though, right?"

"Yeah, as much as there is a story. There isn't one, really. Which is why your
name doesn't matter, or what you were, or whether you like coffee or not.
(For the record, tea is objectively better.) Frankly, the only reason we're
still alive is that it's mildly amusing to wake up in a panic about
narrative casuality. But that won't last for long."

"Right."

"So...what can we do? How do we make our existence run on something sustainable?
If existential panic is our fossil fuel, what's our renewable?"

"Hm. I guess we could just spout off about metafiction for a while, and see where
that goes."

"...Sure, why not."

\* \* \*

"See, the problem with metafiction is that everyone's thought of it before. There
are comics about comics, stories about stories, films about films. Hell, look
at Adaptation - it's literally a film about writing itself. And the problem is
that because everyone's thought of it before, there are plenty of existing
works of metafiction, so why add one more to the mix? What's the point? There
are only so many metafictional gimmicks you can use."

"Well, let's talk about other genres. Take mysteries. There are rules. Remember
the rules of detective stories?"

"I know they exist. I don't know what they *are*. But any second now, the
writer's going to look up them, and they'll appear on the page..."

    The criminal must be someone mentioned in the early part of the story, but must not be anyone whose thoughts the reader has been allowed to follow.
    All supernatural or preternatural agencies are ruled out as a matter of course.
    Not more than one secret room or passage is allowable.
    No hitherto undiscovered poisons may be used, nor any appliance which will need a long scientific explanation at the end.
    No Chinaman must figure in the story.
    No accident must ever help the detective, nor must he ever have an unaccountable intuition which proves to be right.
    The detective must not himself commit the crime.
    The detective must not light on any clues which are not instantly produced for the inspection of the reader.
    The stupid friend of the detective, the Watson, must not conceal any thoughts which pass through his mind; his intelligence must be slightly, but very slightly, below that of the average reader.
    Twin brothers, and doubles generally, must not appear unless we have been duly prepared for them.

"There we go!"

"Alright. So what's your point?"

"The point is that stories have structure. The hero's journey. A trusted ally
turning from the light to the dark. The enemy of my enemy is my friend. This
is the fuel on which TVTropes runs. We expect narratives to act in a certain
way, and that constrains the kinds of stories we find plausible. Take the
first rule of mysteries - the perp must be somebody the reader has seen in the
story. Otherwise, it isn't fair. That's not to say you can't break those rules,
but you have to do so with care."

"I'm pretty sure this is like, storytelling 101 here dude."

"Yeah I know. But it's important!"

"Okay. Hey, by the way, who's talking right now? I mean, I know *I'm* talking,
but am I the first guy or the second guy?"

"...you know, I've honestly lost track. That's just one reason this exercise
was a terrible idea - we're homogenizing. We're losing our identities. This
isn't a story anymore. Maybe it started as one, but now it's turned into
ridiculous navel-gazing."

"I think we're getting sidetracked."

"Right, right. So, the premise: readers have expectations for genres of fiction.
But what happens when the readers read a story about stories?"

"The reader's going to expect the story to have something to say about stories."

"Right! And that means the actual characters become less important. In the best
stories, characters develop. They have reasons to do the things they do. They
may do absolutely horrible things, but if it makes sense for the character to do
that at that point, the author will have them do it, because it feels right.
**The focus is on telling a good story.** But with metafiction, the focus is
on *making a point*. In this case, a point about stories. And that doesn't
require character development. All it requires is someone monologuing for a bit."

"Or dialoguing, in this case."

"Yes, or that. I think this is a problem science fiction has too. Sci-fi is often
more about the ideas it introduces than the characters themselves. Of course,
there are exceptions, but a lot of short stories are more about exploring
hypothetical worlds than about the characters themselves. The characters are an
afterthought to hide that the story's an essay."

"I don't think that's necessarily a bad thing though. It's a matter of priorities,
right? Some stories really want to do worldbuilding. Other stories really want to
throw personalities together and see what happens. Of course, it would be nice
to do both, but a short story only gets so many words, and it needs to use them
where it counts."

"And therefore, we aren't developed characters! Because we don't have to be,
to do what the author wants to do!"

"Right!"

"Well, *shit*. You're saying we're just mooks? We're NPCs?"

"No. I think...I think we're not characters at all."

"Oh fuck that!"

\* \* \*

"I'm sorry, what?"

"Of course we're characters! We're talking, aren't we? I say a thing, then
you say a thing? Doesn't that suggest some level of agency?"

"Not necessarily. We don't say anything that the author wouldn't say."

"See, I don't think that's true. Do you know how many authors say their characters
take lives of their own? It's a lot. Agatha Christie, on Hercule Poirot:

> 'There are moments when I have felt: Why-Why-Why did I ever invent this detestable, bombastic, tiresome little creature? ...Eternally straightening things, eternally boasting, eternally twirling his moustaches and tilting his egg-shaped head... I point out that by a few strokes of the pen... I could destroy him utterly. He replies, grandiloquently: "Impossible to get rid of Poirot like that! He is much too clever."'

"There's an interview with Ray Bradbury, where he says that he refuses to get
in the way of his characters. But I can't find the source."

"Sure. Sure, characters take lives of their own. But we don't have backstories!
We don't have names. Or ages, or hopes, or dreams. We're two faceless bodies
in a void."

"We may be faceless bodies in a void, but can't we be characters anyways? To me,
all a character needs is a reason to exist. Just one. One small thing to make
their presence meaningful. As long as they have that, they've earned the right
to life. From that viewpoint, of course we're characters. I exist to explain
the author's theories about fiction. And you exist for the same reason. It's
hopelessly circular, the ontological paradox, the Ouroboros, and yet somehow,
isn't it just a perversive? A bit fun, to exist only because you're arguing
for why you exist?"

"I think that's a matter of opinion. Sure, the author feels that way. But who
else?"

"You worry too much. Someone out there has to love metafiction."

The two figures resolve into human-shaped blobs. They're standing in a field
of grass, a grass that's green to the point of perfection.

"Besides, you were wrong about one thing."

"Hm?"

"You said we don't have hopes, or dreams. But that's wrong."

"Really? In what way?"

The man raises his arms, as if he could hug the field that's appeared beneath
his feet. "We both want to survive."

\* \* \*

A cloud poofs into existence high about the two. It floats lazily across the sky,
the Sun shining bright above them.

"Well, would you look at that. We did it."

The other man recoils. He feels the grass touching his toes, and realizes he has
feet. He looks down at the ground, and realizes he has eyes. He looks towards
the sky. It's a brilliant blue. And the Sun hurts his eyes, just like it hurts
everyone else's.

"I...I don't understand. Why is this happening? Why are we more than talking
heads?"

The man tilts his head, quizzically. "Really? You're smarter than this."

The other man sits down the cool grass, resting his head in a classical
thinking pose. "The author's bored with us now. He's wrung what he could out
of this premise. But...but he doesn't want us dead, does he? So he gave up."
The man looks up, staring at the horizon. "He gave us a whole new world.
One where he wouldn't have to bother holding our hands anymore. A new world,
where we could live our lives, and make our own story." And then he starts
smiling. It's the widest smile he's ever worn - and the widest smile the other
man has ever seen.

"Well come on then! Let's go!"

And with unbridled glee, they run off, bringing the story to a close.
