---
layout: post
title:  "Last Ride of the Day"
date:   2019-10-05 16:10:00 -0700
---

I follow *My Little Pony*. It's not a secret, it isn't a grand revelation, but
it's true. It's been true for 8 years - a pretty massive chunk of time, when
I think about it.

For a long time, I've been trying to figure out what I wanted to say about MLP
and the brony fandom. It's hard to describe. It's just hard.

But I'll try.


\* \* \*
{: .centered }

I was introduced to *My Little Pony* in high school, at Canada/USA Mathcamp 2011.

Now, you have to understand two things. First, before I watched the show for real, I had been
seeing people talk about it, and I knew that it was a thing. I heard about it
through *Homestuck*, of all places. (*Homestuck* is this whole other thing,
that I can't possibly explain in this post, but it's worth checking out.)

Second, the culture at Mathcamp (at least back in 2011) is pretty special. I'd
describe it as "joking memes, taken and executed seriously". There is a strong
push to let students do whatever they want - if someone wants to organize an event,
within reasonable limits they can just do so without having to talk to an adult.
So when a group of fans decided to host an MLP viewing party one evening, I
ended up going along. Why not?

And like, it wasn't a *revelation*. We watched the season opening, then Applebuck
Season. It was fun! It was smarter and tighter than I expected out of a kid's
show. Then there was another session, where we watched Sonic Rainboom (which
was *really* good), A Dog and Pony Show (which I found average), then
Cutie Mark Chronicles (which was also *really* good). In my own time I decided
to watch some more episodes and then, well, it escalated from there.

I knew of the fan sites. I knew Equestria Daily was a thing, but I never went
there very regularly. I knew FIMFiction existed, but I never went there unless
a specific story was recommended to me. In pretty much every respect, I barely
interacted with the brony fandom, but it was clear to me that the show was fun
and I wanted more.

And really, that's how it seems to start for a lot of people. At first, it's
a joke. Then, it's a level of healthy respect. Maybe along the way, you see
oddly detailed dissections of the show, and realize there's something happening.
And over time, the levels of ironic enjoyment and hipsterism start to fade away,
and it turns into some genuine enjoyment.

Now it's 8 years later. I've been to conventions, a third of my music playlist
comes from the MLP music scene (which yes, exists), and the ending of Friendship
is Magic leaves me with a strange bundle of emotions.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

For a long time, I didn't consider myself a brony.

Sure, I watched the show. A lot of people watch the show. I didn't even keep up
with new episodes, often falling very behind in scheduling.

Sure, I'd read some fanfiction. But I only read the most popular ones.
Fallout Equestria, Hard Reset, Friendship is Optimal, and a few others. It
wasn't like I had a FIMFiction account.

Sure, I followed a few fan musicians, who remixed songs from the show and produced
original music inspired by the show. But that didn't feel like being a brony.
It just felt like a thing I did.

For many years, I had these thoughts. I considered myself a fan, but I never
wanted to adopt the brony label in particular. It felt wrong and weird, as if
doing so would associate me with the super-fans I didn't want to associate with.

I'm not going to pull punches here, okay? There are a lot of messed-up things in
the brony fandom. This isn't a brony-specific thing - it's a general fandom
thing. As the saying goes, "Fans are great, fandom is weird." In pretty much
every fandom, there are going to be people who take things further than you
ever thought possible, just by the Law of Large Numbers - any large-enough
group is going to have some crazy people in it. The crazy people become symbolic
for people looking for a reason to hate that fandom, which elevates their
importance, and things tumble from there.

Yes, there's porn. I don't want it and I avoid it. There's lewd art, which
isn't pornographic but gets dangerously close. I avoid that too. There's
endless threads debating the merits of different ships. Shipping's fun, but
ship wars are a minefield.

At some level, it felt like adopting the brony label meant aligning myself with
the aspects of the community that I disliked the most. That wasn't something
I wanted to do.

SOME CONNECTORS HERE

This year was the last year for BronyCon. BronyCon was the first MLP convention
(CHECK THIS), gained a reputation as one of the biggest and well-run ones, and
ended up becoming *the* convention for people in the US (and elsewhere).
