---
layout: post
title:  "Mystery Hunt 2019"
date:   2019-01-21 18:13:00 -0500
---

Here is a lesson that should be obvious: if you are trying to hit a paper
deadline, going to Mystery Hunt the weekend before that deadline is a bad idea.
In my defense, in the weeks leading up to the deadline, I wasn't expecting to
make it. Combined with the huge airport troubles getting out of Boston, I ended
up landing in California at 11 AM the day before ICML deadline, with the
horrible combination of a ruined sleep schedule and a lack of sleep in the first
place from Hunt. But, now I've recovered, and finally have time to talk about
Hunt.

I hunted with teammate this year. It's an offshoot of ✈✈✈ Galactic
Trendsetters ✈✈✈, leaning towards the CMU and Berkeley contingents of the team.
When deciding between Galactic and teammate, I chose teammate because I expected
it to be smaller and more serious. We ended up similar in size to Galactic.

Overall feelings on Hunt can be summed up as, "Those puzzles were great, but I
wish we'd finished." Historically, if multiple teams finish Mystery Hunt,
Galactic is one of those teams, and since teammate was of similar size, I
expected teammate to finish as well. However, since Hunt was trickier this year,
only one team finished all the metas. I was a bit disappointed that we didn't get to do the
runaround, but oh well, that's just how it goes.

I did get the feeling that a lot of puzzles had more grunt work than last time
Setec ran a Hunt, but I haven't checked this, and it's possible that I only feel
this way because unlocks were more constrained, forcing us to solve the more
laborious puzzles. (I did not work on First You Visit Burkina Faso, but I did
here about all the pain it caused.) Having puzzles with lots of IDing and data
entry is fine, it's important to have something where you know exactly how to
contribute to the puzzle, but it becomes overwhelming if there's too much of it.


\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Starting from here, there are more substantial puzzle spoilers.

The story starts several weeks before Mystery Hunt. Someone had found Alex
Rosenthal's TED talk about Mystery Hunt. We knew Alex Rosenthal was on Setec,
and that Setec had embedded puzzle data in a TED talk before. We got INNOVATED
out of the TED talk puzzle, and it quickly became a team meme that teammate
would submit INNOVATED right as Hunt opened. This evolved to, "Since NOV is a
substring of INNOVATED, the meta INNOVATED goes to will work by extracting month
abbreviations from puzzle answers." Imagine our surprise when we learn the hunt
is Holiday themed - month meta confirmed!

(EMBED?)

I spent the day before Hunt playing Two Rooms and a Boom with people from
Galactic. It's not puzzle related but the game's cool enough that I'll mention
it anyways. It's a social deduction game, where one person is the President, another
person is the Bomber, and (almost) everyone else is trying to get the President
in the same or different room from the Bomber. Now, here's the gimmick: by same
room, I mean the literal same room. People are divided across two rooms, and
periodically, each room decides who to send to other room. People initially have
secret roles, but there are ways to share your roles with other players, leading
to a game of figuring out who to trust, who you can't trust, and concealing who
you *do* trust, as well as deciding how you want to ferry information across the
two rooms. It's neat.

Right before kickoff, I learned about the Mystery Hunt Betting Pool, thought it
was fun, and bet on Palindrome. I later learned that only 4 people participated
we were all mutual friends with each other, and we had all guessed wrong. As per
the agreement, no one won anything and the money was donated to Mystery Hunt.

Every Hunt, I tend to look mostly at metapuzzles, then switch to regular puzzles
when stuck on metas. This Hunt was no different. Overall I feel this means I
look at metas more than I should, in that I don't make good calls on when we
need more regular answers, but sometimes it pays off.


Puzzles
-----------------------------------------------------

I did a mix of GIF of the Magi and Tough Enough, which were both pretty solid.
I then took a look at Christmas-Halloween with some other people. We figured out
the mechanic pretty quickly, which was easy to fill-in with incomplete info,
which was easy to backsolve. Presumably a few other teams had a similar
experience, based on the backsolving attempts from wrap-up.

Backsolving philosophy is different across teams. teammate borrows the same culture
as Galactic - when backsolving, wait for your answer to be confirmed wrong
before trying it for the next puzzle, but otherwise, it is okay to backsolve
multiple puzzles at once. We got feedback to backsolve less aggressively and
toned down our backsolve attempts by a lot.

We learned that Haunted was the TED puzzle, and had a good laugh when the clue
phrase said "NOT INNOVATED, SORT FIRST".

I did not work on Common Flavors, but at some point, someone tried brewing one
of the teas, thought it tasted bad, and decided that these couldn't possibly be
real teas, so they cut open the tea bags and started trying to identify things
by phonelight. This didn't work, we ended up backsolving it.

We See Thee Rise was a fun puzzle. It was all about clues where the location
was wrong, and the realization that "oh my God, we're making the Canadian flag!"
was great. Even if our maple leaf doesn't look that glorious in Google Sheets...

I did not work on The Turducken Konundrum, but I heard that we solved it with
zero backtracking, which was very impressive.

I contributed...well, almost nothing to Your Wish is My Command, but I had the
right idea on how to do all the extraction. Three other people had the same
ideas, so, yeah. Based on the solve stats we have, we got the fastest solve, so
that's nice.

For 7 Little Dropquotes, we used...well, seven different groups of people. I was
pretty impressed at the printing trickery - when printed, the colors are changed
to Roman numerals. Somehow we got fastest solve on 7 Little Dropquotes. I didn't
think our solve was particularly quick, but we did have a pretty smooth solve
and we solved all the dropquotes. For future reference, Nutrimatic
trivializes dropquotes, because the longer you make the word, the more likely it
is that only one word fits the regex. This means you can use Nutrimatic on all
the long clues humans find hard, and use humans on all the short clues Nutrimatic finds hard. I
have learned I am really bad at solving dropquotes, but really good at typing regexes into
Nutrimatic and telling people "that long word is INTELLECTUAL".

Be Mine was an absurd puzzle. By the time I got to it, all the elements were
IDed. The break-in was realizing that we should fill in "night" as "nite" and
find minerals, at which point it became a silly game of "Is plumbopalladinite a
mineral?" and "Wait, cupromakopavonite is a thing?" The extraction for this
puzzle was decent in hindsight, but I found it annoying. I was trying to find
the chemical compounds word-search style. The person I was solving with was
trying to find elements that overlapped with the mineral name in the grid. I
didn't like this theory because this meant there would be a few minerals that
wouldn't extract anything, because their name didn't overlap with any of their
elements. We tried both and it was clear that I was wrong and they were right,
which bothers me from an elegance standpoint, but the mineral IDing was pretty
fun.

If you like puzzlehunt encodings, The Bill is the puzzle for you. A group of us
spent an oddly long amount of time tracking down all the encoded data.

Okay, there's a fun story behind State Machine. At some point, we realized that
it was cluing the connectivity graph of the continental United States. I worked
on implementing the state machine in code while other people worked on IDing the
states. Once that was IDed, I ran it, got out the answer, copied it into sheets,
and got something weird because I didn't have tabs in my output. I tried fixing
it, failed to fix it, and then we had 3 people simultaneously go, "I can fix
this in Google Sheets!" After several minutes, we finally had clean indices, and
got the answer KATE BAR THE DOOR, which was...wrong. After lots of confusion we
found out that we had actually cleaned the data wrong, and had gotten 0 for New Hampshire instead of
10. This was *hilarious* at 2 AM and I broke down laughing.

For Middle School of Mines, I didn't work on the puzzle, but I walked by people
figuring out the Minesweeper grids, noticed the giant 0 in the grid so far, and
said, "Oh no, I don't like where this puzzle is going." It then turned out the
people solving the puzzle hadn't noticed the giant 0, in a rather literal case
of "missing the forest of the threes".

I had a lot of fun with Deeply Confused. Despite doing deep learning in my
actual day job, I was embarassed to learn that I didn't have an on-hand way to
call Inception-v3 from my laptop. We ended up using a web API anyways, because
Keras was giving us the wrong results. Looking at the solution, the issue was
probably that we forgot to normalize the image array before using
`inception_v3.InceptionV3()`.

Chris Chros was a fun puzzle that showed me there were a lot of famous actors
played by Chrises.

He's Out!!! was a puzzle that went from "huh" to "wow, neat!" when we figured
out that a punchout in baseball means a strikeout, and that all the players we
IDed were emergency pitchers and had struck out exactly one person.

Tree Ring Circus was neat. I felt clever for extracting the ring sizes by
looking up their size in the SVG drawing. I then felt stupid (and clever in a
different way) when I realized this was intended, to make the ring sizes exactly
match up with real ring sizes.

Cubic was cute. We had someone bash out all the roots, did a count, found that
every root appeared exactly twice, and went, "HMMMMMMMM". With the graph
hinting, we started drawing the graphs, realized the title meant "cubic graphs",
and it fell from there.

Around Sunday 2-4 AM, we got caught by the time unlock, and went into what can
only be called beast mode. Somehow, we managed to keep pace with the time
unlock for several hours, solving puzzles at an average rate of 1 per 15
minutes. One of those puzzles was Divine the Rule of Kings, which we just...did.
Like, it just happened. Really weird. There were some memes about "can someone
pull up the US state connectivity graph, again, for the 3rd time?". Evidently a
few puzzle authors like that graph a lot.

Of the regular puzzles I solved, I'd say my favorite was Getting Digits. Somehow
we had a chain of ahas. First "ON and OFF!", then "Ohhhh it's START", then "ohhh
it's a phone number". It's a simple extraction but there's still something cool
about calling a phone number while expecting something magical to happen.


Metapuzzles
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite looking at a lot of metas, I didn't contribute to many of them. The one
where I unequivocably helped was figuring out the turkey pardon connection for
Thanksgiving-President's Day.

This section really exists for two reasons. The first is the
Halloween-Thanksgiving meta. We were stuck for quite a while, assuming that the
meta worked by overlaying three Halloween town answers with three Thanksgiving
answers with food substrings, and extracting using blood types in some way.
This was a total red herring, since the food names mostly came from turkeys for
the Thanksgiving-President's meta. But, according to the people who solved it,
the reason they finally tried ternary on the blood types was because we had a
bingo square for "Puzzle uses ternary in extraction", and they wanted to get
that square. After Hunt ended, we talked about how we were surprised there was
no Magic: the Gathering reference for that bingo square, which led to the color
pie, which led to colored wedges, which led to figuring out the Trivial Pursuit
a-ha for the Pi-Holi meta. Based on a sample size of 2, I'm now claiming that
Mystery Hunt Bingo is not only a fun diversion during hunt, it's also a decent
source of "Have you tried..." ideas.

The second reason is the Arbor-Pi meta. We had the core idea the whole time -
do something based on digits after the Feynmann point. The problem was that we
horribly overcomplicated it. Somehow we had convinced ourselves that the meta
was based around
