---
layout: post
title:  "What Size Should NeurIPS Be?"
date:   2019-11-18 00:20:00 -0700
---

Ostensibly, I'm on vacation. However, it's raining, I have a bit
of inspiration, and I haven't written a post in a while, so buckle up,
here are some more machine learning opinions. I read some discussion about
the size of NeurIPS, mostly from [Andrey Kurenkov's post at The Gradient](https://thegradient.pub/neurips-2019-too-big/),
and wanted to weigh in.

I've been to three NeurIPS: 2016, 2017, and 2019. So, no, I haven't really
been around that long. NeurIPS 2016 was my first academic conference ever,
so I didn't really know what to expect. By NeurIPS 2017, I'd been to a few
and could confidently say that NeurIPS 2017 felt too big. By NeurIPS 2019,
I was no longer sure that was true.

Before going to NeurIPS 2016, I got some advice from senior researchers:
if you aren't skipping talks, you're doing it wrong. I promptly ignored
this advice and tried to attend every talk I could, but now I get what
they meant.

Early on in your research career, it makes sense to go to talks. You know
less about the field and you know fewer people. As you become more senior,
it makes less sense to go to talks. It's more likely you know the topic
of the talk already, and you know more people, so their value goes down
compared to the
research conversations you can have over drinks or lunch.
Conference organizers know this.
Ever wonder why there
are so many coffee breaks, and why they're all much longer than they'd
need to be if people were just getting coffee? Important, valuable
meetings are happening during those coffee breaks.

In the limit, people attend conferences to meet up with the people they
only see at conferences. As some from the Bay Area, the running joke is that
we travel halfway across the world to talk to people who live an hour's
drive away.
It's not that we don't want to talk to each other, it's that the conference
environment provides a much lower activation energy to scheduling
meetups, and it's easier to have serendipitous run-ins with people we
haven't seen in a while.

In this model of a research conference, all the posters, accepted papers,
talks, and so on are backgroud noise. They exist as the default option
for people who don't have plans, or who want a break from socializing.
That default option is critically
important to keeping everything going, but they're not the point of
the conference. The point of the conference is for everyone in the
research community to gather at the same place at the same time.
If you've been to fan conventions, it's a very similar dynamic.

If you take this model as true, then NeurIPS's unofficial status as
the biggest ML conference is incredibly important. If you could only
go to one conference each year, you'd go to NeurIPS, because everyone
else is going to go to NeurIPS.

And if NeurIPS is the place to be, shouldn't NeurIPS be as big as it needs
to be?

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Well, maybe. NeurIPS attendance is growing, but the growth is coming
from different sources.

Year over year, NeurIPS has been growing way faster than any of the
PhD programs that could be feeding into it. I would guess it's growing
faster than the undergrads and master's students as well. If the growth
isn't coming from universities, it has to be coming from industry and
the broader data science community - a community that is much larger
and of a different makeup than the traditional ML research crowd.

I said NeurIPS is about networking, but the question is, networking
between who?
It started as networking between researchers,
because the makeup of attendees at the time was mostly researchers,
and it's been shifting ever since deep learning hype took off. It
is increasingly likely that if you talk to a random attendee, they'll
be an ML enthusaist or someone working in an ML-related role at a big
company, rather than someone in a PhD program.

And I should be really, really clear here: that's not necessarily a
bad thing! But people in a PhD program have different priorities from
people working at a big company, and that's causing a culture clash.
The size debate is just a proxy for the real debate about what
NeurIPS should be.
Machine learning conferences are in the middle of their
[Eternal September](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eternal_September)
moment.

In the early 1990s, there was this thing called Usenet (essentially an
online, distributed forum), and
most Usenet users came from connections given to colleges and universities.
Every September, a new wave of students would join, and they'd stir
a fuss, but the influx was
small enough for existing Usenet culture to absorb them without much
change. Then, AOL opened Usenet access to anyone who wanted it. Usenet
culture couldn't integrate the firehose of interest, and it became
known as the Eternal September. The original Usenet culture turned
into whatever culture made sense for the new users.

The parallels to NeurIPS are uncanny. A simple find-replace exactly
describes what's happening now, from the people saying NeurIPS is turning
into a spectacle, to the people who can't buy tickets to a conference
they really want to attend.
Despite their foreboding name, Eternal Septembers are not inherently
bad. They are what they are. But generally, they're good for people trying
to join, and bad for people that are already there.

So the real question is, who is NeurIPS for?
Is it for the established researchers to talk shop?
The newer researchers trying to present their work and build a career?
The data scientist looking for new applications of ML research?
Right now, it's for all of them, and the organizers are doing their best
to balance everyone's interests correctly, which is an incredibly difficult job I
wouldn't wish on anyone. The one thing that seems clear to me is that
a pure, academic-only NeurIPS untethered from industry is never going to
happen.
You don't stop Eternal September. Eternal September is something
that happens to you, and the best you can do is nudge the final outcome
the best you can.

It's a crazy solution, and I don't know if it even makes sense, but maybe
NeurIPS needs to be split in two. Have one act as the submission venue,
where people submit and present their research, with heavier restrictions
on who's allowed to attend, and have the other act as the open-to-everyone
conference. If NeurIPS's growing pains are caused by it trying to be
something for everyone, then maybe we need to split its responsiblities.
