---
layout: post
title:  "The Carbon Footprint of Buying a Car"
date:   2020-01-13 00:20:00 -0700
---

My car's dead. It went through a long series of death throes, almost making it
all the way through the pandemic, but now it's dead (or rather, expensive enough
to fix that it's not worth it, compared to the value of the car).

I still need a car! Although you can skip one in SF, South Bay is
still a sprawling suburban hellscape if you don't have a car.

I also want to consider the carbon footprint of my decision. What should I do?

In a bid to be more environmentally conscious, I want to reduce the carbon
footprint of the replacement car. What should I do?

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Let's start with some crude estimates to figure out the trade-offs, and continue
from there.

First off - electric, hybrid, or gas? This is supposed to be obvious, but maybe
it's not. In high school, one of my teachers claimed that a new Toyota Prius was
worse for the environment than a new Hummer over the course of its lifetime,
because the CO2 emitted during production time was much higher. I never checked
this claim, and it was 10 years ago. Let's see if we can find some sources.

The European Parliament has [an infographic](https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20200109STO69925/understanding-the-gender-pay-gap-definition-and-causes)
for lifetime CO2 emissions from different kinds of cars, from 2014.

https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/priorities/climate-change/20190313STO31218/co2-emissions-from-cars-facts-and-figures-infographics

IMAGE HERE

The green bars are the share from vehicle production. The top bar is a gasoline car,
the second bar is a diesel car, and the last 3 are electric cars under different
assumptions of clean power.
Lifetime CO2 emissions are measured in g/km, assuming a 150,000 km mileage. This
is about 93,000 miles for the Americans out there. Unfortunately I wasn't able
to find the primary source for this chart, but at a glance, electric cars do pay a
higher up-front cost in CO2 emissions. It looks like about 62.5g CO2/km versus
50g CO2/k, a 25% increase. However, this is later offset by the decreased emissions
from power generation. The exact difference depends on how clean your electricity is.
At the extreme ends, an electric car powered by electricity from coal is worse than a
gasoline car! However, the average EU resident can expect about 170 g/km for an electric
car and 220 g/km for a gasoline car.

Other sources (FIND THEM) give a similar conclusion: the short-term boost in emissions is
offset by the long-term ownership of the car. A lifetime mileage of 93,000 strikes me as an
underestimate, given that many EV manufacturers offer 100,000 mile warranties on their batteries,
so owning an electric vehicle should be better than the numbers shown.

The [Alternative Fuels Data Center](https://afdc.energy.gov/vehicles/electric_emissions.html)
from the Department of Energy has a tool that lets you estimate annual
emissions for different kinds of vehicles, with breakdowns by state.
Their estimate is that a gasoline car produces 11,435 pounds of CO2 (5.19
tonnes, more than the EPA's estimate). For the average US power grid,
a hybrid produces 6,258 pounds of CO2 annually (2.84 tonnes), and an electric car produces
4,358 pounds of CO2 annually (1.98 tonnes).

This doesn't even get into the argument for electric vehicles I find most compelling:
gas vehicles are forever locked into using gasoline, whereas electric vehicles will become
greener over time as power grids move towards renewable energy. Electricity is inherently
more fungible, it doesn't matter where it comes from, and that helps avoid situations
where suboptimal technology gets locked in early. Even if electric vehicles were on par
with gasoline cars for lifetime emissions, it would still be better for the environment
to get an electric car.

In California, on average, an all electric car
produces 2,117 pounds of CO2 annually - less than half the national average, thanks
to heavier usage of solar and hydropower. I expect electricity to become greener
over time. There's enough pressure from climate protestors that I believe we're
going to see power companies do environmentally friendly things for PR reasons,
even if they don't particularly care about the environment. This is similar to
how some companies figured out that paying lip service to LGBT rights was good
PR - it's not the ideal scenario, but it's better than nothing.

Interestingly, some sources find that right now, hybrids are better for the
environment than an electric car. [CarbonBrief](https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-how-electric-vehicles-help-to-tackle-climate-change)
has some charts summarizing a few sources, showing how lifetime emissions drastically
change depending which country's power grid you use. However, if you get a car
that's partly gas-powered, tailpipe emissions are never going to drop, while
power grid emissions could drop with development of new technology.


\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Okay. So, we've established that the obvious answer of buying hybrid or electric
cars is better for the environment. However, this ignores another important
question: used or new?

Consider the chart from before. For both gas and electric cars, a sizeable chunk
(25-30%) of the CO2 emissions comes from production. If you buy a used car instead
of a new one, then it's an immediate 25% drop in emissions. Right?

Well, it depends how far you want to carry out the consequentialist chain. Say
you buy a used car directly from someone else. That person may choose to have
no car, or they may choose to get a replacement car. If they replace it with a new
car, then you haven't changed anything - in the end you caused 1 new car to be
produced, and all the emissions that entails.

In reality, not everyone will replace their car, and buying a used car is equivalent
to producing some *fraction* of a new car. If that fraction is $$p$$, then you
save $$p\cdot 25\%$$ of the emissions. But what's $$p$$? Intuitively, $$p$$ is probably
close to 100%, since people need transportation, but is there a way we can estimate it?

As a simple model, let's assume that everyone owns 0 or 1 car, and everyone acts the same
way. Let's say that after buying a used car from someone, they have a XX% chance of not replacing it, a YY% chance of buying a new car, and a
ZZ% chance of buying a used car from a third person. If the last case happens, that third person no
longer has a car, and must make the same decision: don't replace, buy new, or buy used. Then the
fraction of new cars that leads to is

$$
p = x \cdot 0 + y \cdot 1 + z \cdot p
$$

which solves to $$p = y/(1-z) = y / (x+y)$$. In other words, it's the number of new car sales,
divided by (new cars + people who don't replace their car). Counting new car sales is easy: it's
projected to be [14.4 million](https://www.dbusiness.com/daily-news/2020-u-s-new-vehicle-sales-projected-at-14-4m-decline-of-15-5-from-2019/)
for 2020. We can then check numbers
from the [Bureau of Transportation Statistics](https://www.bts.gov/content/number-us-aircraft-vehicles-vessels-and-other-conveyances).
Between 2013 and 2018, the number of vehicle registrations increased by 18 million, so let's say
3.6 million vehicle registrations per year. That means that each year, 14.4 million new cars
are produced, and 14.4 - 3.6 = 10.8 million vehicles leave the road. That gives

$$
p = 14.4 / (14.4 + 10.8) = 0.57
$$

which is actually a lot smaller than I expected. I expect it to be closer to 0.8.



This means about $$1/12$$ vehicles leave the road each year, and $$1% + 1/12$$
new vehicles are produced each year. This latter value should be $$y$$

The net increase in vehicle registration should be $$y - x$$, 

One simple model we could use is this: after buying a used car from someone,
they have a XX% chance of not replacing it, a YY% chance of buying a new car, and a
ZZ% chance of buying a used car from a third person. That third person then has the same
decision: don't replace, buy new, or buy used. This chain continues unrolling until someone decides
not to get a replacement car, or they buy a new car.

Assuming everyone acts with the same odds, and each person in this model has 0 or 1 car,
we can let $$k$$ by the number of new cars you cause to be bought if you buy a used car.
Solving for $$k$$ gives $$k = y / (x+y)$$, as mentioned above.

If you carry the chain of car-buys out,
then the 
re-entering the loop. In that model, if we let
$$k$$ be the number of new cars you cause to be bought, you get

$$
k = x * 0 + y * 1 + z * k
$$

which solves to $$k = y / (1-z) = y / (x+y)$$. (Yes, there's a lot this model doesn't cover, but
I'm only looking for a rough estimate.) That leaves figuring out what $$y$$ and $$z$$
are. I didn't find good direct estimates of this, but we could try to derive it from other stats.

We could look at the fraction of used cars sold, compared to new cars. However, this only tells
us how much larger one is *relative* to the other. We need to get an approximation of how many
people choose not to replace their cars every year.

I haven't found a great estimate for that. We could look at what fraction of households don't have
access to a vehicle - recent numbers put that at (https://www.valuepenguin.com/auto-insurance/car-ownership-statistics)
8.7%, with it staying fairly steady since 2016. This isn't exactly what we want, because households
aren't people and often have more than 1 car. We could check how many total vehicle registrations there
are.

Based on numbers from [Statista](https://www.statista.com/statistics/183505/number-of-vehicles-in-the-united-states-since-1990/),
new vehicle registration grows at about 1% per year. Meanwhile, the average age of vehicles in the US is 11.9 years, as of 2020. (https://www.cnbc.com/2020/07/28/25percent-of-cars-in-us-are-at-least-sixteen-years-old----record-high.html)

That means that approximately 1 in 12 cars go off the road each year. Since

(net increase in vehicle registration) = (increase in new cars bought) - (cars that go off the road each year)

1% = ?% - 1/12

Meanwhile, Americans are changing cars about every 7 years on average (estimates seem to range
from 6 to 8 years, with an upward trend since 2010 thanks to the Great Recession). Meanwhile,
the number of registered vehicles in the US grows fairly slowly (an increase of about 1% a year
based on  https://www.statista.com/statistics/183505/number-of-vehicles-in-the-united-states-since-1990/)

1/12 cars leave the road every year
1% new registrations each year
so 1/12 + 1%

(1% more new cars per year) = (1/12 new car purchases) - (
(fraction new cars) =

So, one way to view this is that every year, 1 in 7 Americans replace their car, and 1 in 12 Americans
buy a new car. We know that (car replacements) = (used car transactions) + (new car transactions)

new cars


other stats.

* Median number of times a car has been owned.
* Fraction of used cars vs new cars

This [Guardian article](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/sep/23/carbon-footprint-new-car)
from 2010 says that purchasing a medium-sized new car is about
17 tonnes of CO2. The [EPA greenhouse gas guidlines](https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passenger-vehicle)
from 2020 estimates that a gasoline car emits about 4.6 tonnes of CO2 per year.
Now obviously we're comparing 2010 production numbers to 2020 estimates,
so it's not super accurate, but this suggests that buying a new car is worth
about 3.7 years of driving it.

Let's say a car lasts about 10 years. Taking $$3.7 / (10+3.7)$$ gives
27% of a gasoline car's emissions comes from initial production, and the
rest comes from fuel. So how do hybrid and electric car production emissions
compare to that?
