---
layout: post
title:  "Mystery Hunt 2020, Part 2"
date:   2020-01-22 03:10:00 -0500
---

I realize it's a while after Mystery Hunt, but now that
[My Little Pony: Puzzles Are Magic](https://www.puzzlesaremagic.com/) has
wrapped up, I have time to finish my post about Mystery Hunt 2020.
(I may have some more personal posts about Puzzles are Magic after this, but
no promises.)

I got to Boston on Wednesday night, spending Thursday working remotely. As I
said in Part 1, I hunted with teammate this year, and we spent the day before
hunt socializing and figuring out logistics. I ended up acquiring a bunch of
power strips the day before Hunt, with no room in my carry-on to bring them
back, so all those power strips got donated to other team members by
the end of Hunt.

Before Hunt start, we read through the rules and learned answer checking would
be automated this year. As has been said many times elsewhere, teammate tends
to be very aggressive on answer guesses. Speaking personally (and definitely
not for others on the team), here's why I tend
to send a lot guesses during Hunt.

To me, good puzzle solvers are distinguished
by their ability to correctly generalize from limited data, solve around
mistakes they've made in data collection, and rapidly form and discard hypotheses
about how a puzzle works. More concretely, if you can reliably solve puzzles
from 80% of the clues, it takes 80% of the time per puzzle. Except, in practice,
it works out to *faster* than 80%, because the last 20% of clues are the hardest
ones.
The same principle holds for metapuzzles. If you can solve a
meta from 60% of the feeders, then you get to skip the hardest 40% of that round,
which often works out to less than half the time of a full 100% forward solve.

Because of this, if you're interested in getting faster at hunts, you want to
shortcut everything you believe you can shortcut, and that includes making low
confidence guesses that rely on a few your assumptions being true. The answer
checker acts as a binary signal of "all your generalizations were right", or
"at least one of your generalizations was wrong", and although it's a very
low-bandwidth signal, it's something that's there. So if the hunt lets you
be more aggressive on guesses, I'll naturally use it a bit more.
It's not
personal towards the puzzle author - their puzzle is one of many puzzles
within the cohesive whole that makes up Mystery Hunt.

Sorry, that went on longer than I thought. On to specific puzzle stories.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

I looked around a few puzzles at the beginning, but the one I started first
was Goldilocks. I filled in a few clues, someone else figured out the
mechanic, then I failed to get any more clues and spent my time setting
up indexing in the spreadsheet instead.

The next one I worked on was The Trebuchet, and here it was a similar story.
By the time I got to the puzzle, they had Boggled a few words (the voice
actors from Bolt), and after we realized the ammunition were all puns,
the rest of the walls fell pretty fast. I IDed a few of the shows for
BLOCK OF TNT (wtf SHAQ LIFE is a show??), then started moving letters to
the final wall as we got them. We expected them to slot in automatically,
instead of acting like a drop quote, but I noted we were a few swaps away
from (PHRASE) and someone else finished it from there.

With that puzzle done, I jumped back to Storybook Forest. I briefly looked
at Hackin' the Beanstalk, typing some junk, and noting they looked like
famous algorithms. I opened the sheet for it and saw that every algorithm had
already been IDed. Honestly given the number of CS majors we have I didn't
expect anything else. They tried to figure out indexing for a bit, then
someone threw the authors into nutrimatic and saw [SOURCE FILES](https://nutrimatic.org/?q=%5Bdijkstra%5D%5Bpollard%5D%5Bchudnovsky%5D%5Btarjan%5D%5Beuclid%5D%5Bkadane%5D%5Bfloyd%5D%5Bviterbi%5D%5Bluhn%5D%5Bbresenham%5D%5Bgaleshapley%5D&go=Go) was the first option, and it was right.

With that down, I started looking at Toddler Tilt, which no one had touched yet.
I did a bit of work on it, but had trouble getting the toddlers to fall in the
right order. A few people joined me, I noticed they were figuring it out much
faster than I was, and I decided my time would be better spent on the meta.

Looking through the Storybook Forest meta, I saw there were some tic-tac-toe
theories. We had a lot of 9 letter answers, and the puzzles were arranged in
a 3 x 3 grid. I decided to try extracting the same way as the Dolphin meta
from 20,000 Puzzles Under the Sea, which actually sort of worked, but there
were some weird answers that extracted 2 letters, and there weren't great
ways to use the 11 letter answers. I started looking up tic-tac-toe variants
that might have 11 spots to play, and in the middle of doing so the meta was
solved by someone who didn't believe in any of our tic-tac-toe work.

With that finished, I went back towards The Grand Castle meta.
We had 4 answers in that round, and after some false starts based on
"stately" and "capital", someone discovered the Texas panhandle. I immediately
noted that the panhandle had 26 counties, but out of the final answer of OILMEN,
we had letters LMNO, and that made us think we had an ordering instead.
Writing out the second word of each answer in the panhandle grid gave this.

IMAGE

On seeing this, I proposed that the 2nd words were going to form a cryptic
ending in enumeration SIX. Someone else argued the cryptic would involve
anagramming RACHEL and a possible continuation would be CHARLEMAGNE or
CHARLES, so we called it in, and it was wrong.
We tried a few more variants, but none of those worked either.

We looked at it a bit more, and a 5th feeder answer came in, slotting in
here.

IMAGE

After seeing this, I proposed that we'd actually get *two* cryptics, that
would both share enumeration SIX, and our answer should be a 12-letter
answers. I tried CHARLEMAGNES, plural, and that was wrong. Then someone
found Six Flags Over Texas, which provided an ordering on the clues, and
now that we didn't just have letters LMNO, I was okay with trying the
A-Z idea again, and we solved it.

With those rounds done, it was time to look at Spaceopolis. I watched
our teammates sing karoake, and someone else got the Masked Singer a-ha,
so I decided to do data entry and indexing. The extraction looked bad,
and someone walked around asking for volunteers to solve The Magic
Railway konundrum we'd just unlock. Two of us agreed, and I played a mean
house elf master for about an hour, getting the answer GRACE UNDER FIRE.
With The Magic Railway solved, we saw that Karoake was solved, and opened
the sheet to check what we had missed. It turned out we had extracted the
right letters, and just failed to read it as English.

Sometime shortly after that, we unlocked TEAMWORK TIME: Hat Venn-dor, and
I joined the effort for that. After we solved that, some of us looked at
No Clue Crossword, but we didn't figure out how it worked. We thought it
might have been words that appear in a crossword solver when you
[entered "No clue"](https://www.wordplays.com/crossword-solver/no-clue)
as the clue, but that didn't seem very good, and we ended up backsolving
it.

After that, the next puzzle I did major work on was Food Court. The main
thing this puzzle taught me was that I was horribly out of practice on
probability - these were definitely questions I would have solved without
issue if I was back in undergrad. I got an answer for one, then started
transcribing the probabilities into code to compute the steady state of the
Markov chain. Someone else found an online tool for it, but said "it's garbage,
it's only accurate to the hundredeths place". We tried the steady state
and the numbers didn't seem that good. Given how the puzzle worked, we
figured we needed to check our work. I loudly went around asking people
to help us do math, and was told three times that someone was on it. I
wasn't really listening (my mistake), and on the third time, they sat me
down and explained that

1. They knew someone who made Nationals of MATHCOUNTS.
2. They weren't doing Hunt, so it was okay for us to ask them for help.
3. This someone solved probability problems in their spare time for fun.
4. They were both very fast and very accurate.

About 30 minutes later, that person told us three of our answers were wrong.
We fixed those, reran the Markov chains, and saw that the answers
were all exact hundredths from $$0.01$$ to $$0.26$$, within $$10^-7$$ tolerance
(the error
coming purely from floating-point approximation). So, that was that.

Side note: One of the big lessons I've learned from Puzzles are Magic is
that you always want to check how robust your puzzle is to errors. Solvers
will always, always make errors in solving, even if your clues are 100%
unambiguous. So, if possible, you want to check how robust your puzzle is
to a few errors. The less robust it is, the more likely it is that solvers will
do 90% of the work on a puzzle and fail to finish. If your partials are bad,
it's common that a solver
will try many different incorrect extractions, rather than fixing their data
and trying the correct extraction again. Generally, this means you want
mechanisms that extract one letter at a time, rather than all at once, and
you should check your cluephrase looks promising if you randomly change some
of the letters.

Food Court isn't very robust...but not every puzzle can be made robust without
compromising its idea.
I like the core idea of "you solve a bunch of math problems that seed a Markov chain",
and I do think it's a good puzzle, it's just unfortunate that a consequence
of the design is that solvers either get almost all the letters or none of them.
I guess you just accept this and move on.

And now we come to Change Machine. Oh boy. I started working on this puzzle
because I was told there was a lot of mindless drudgery that needed to be done
to the spreadsheet, and I was too tired to do any real solving. It turned out the puzzle was all
about the Omnibus podcast, and everything had been IDed, but they had been
IDed independently. Now that the Omnibus connection had been found, the main
solvers wanted help arranging the movies and bible verses by Omnibus episode.

I was still confused, and at some point I said "Okay,
it's 3 AM and I'm very tired. I need you to give me idiot-proof instructions
for what you want me to do." Which they did, so props. After everything was
ordered, I suggested indexing the KJ number into the Bible verse (since KJ
was likely short for King James). Reading in episode order gave out
AD AMUSEMENT COMPANY IS KEY.

We were confused. During this process, one person had been looking through
the Ken Jennings subreddit, and discovered a Reddit post where someone
asked what the hell was up with the RIDE ENHANCERS COLLECTIVE? (Find the post)

At this, we had a mental breakdown. Was this seeded information from Left Out?
Was the AD COMPANY Reddit? WAS THIS ACTUALLY HOW WE WERE SUPPOSED TO SOLVE THE
PUZZLE? I started looking up the post history of the Redditor, to see if they
posted on other puzzle subreddits, but all I found were posts on r/teenagers
and other subreddits dating back 10 months ago. Meanwhile, we were applying
some left-over offset numbers to RIDE ENHHANCERS COLLECTIVE, which gave the
answer.

The mental breakdown continued, and after a bunch more of "WHAT DID WE JUST
DO AND WHY DID IT WORK", we figured out that RIDE ENHANCERS COLLECTIVE was
part of the Omnibus episode that came out the weekend of Mystery Hunt. We
concluded that we had probably skipped a bunch of steps and managed to shortcut
directly through the answer thanks to some genuine fans of Omnibus that had
no idea why they got an ad for a company that didn't exist. Reading the
solution, it turned out we skipped every indexing step except the last one,
so our guess was right.


INTRO HERE
esterdayLand was the meta, Jukebox. I mostly
did support, transcribing the blanks, arrangement, and colors into our spreadsheet,
and explaining how I wanted the puzzle to work (fill in the blanks, treat the
colored numbers as positions for the colored blanks, then read the final black
numbers to get the answer). Someone got the modernized answer break-in, we
filled out the answers, got to READ UNDER COLOR NUMBERS, and found we didn't
have enough answers to get the final answer. At this point, I was getting tired and
needed to sleep, so I decided to head back for the night and check on the answer
the next morning.
