---
layout: post
title:  "The Carbon Footprint of Buying a Car"
date:   2020-01-13 00:20:00 -0700
---

The car I've been driving for several years is currently
in its death throes. Well, more precisely, it's been dying a slow death for
ages, but I got normalized to all the small faults. The small faults are
starting to grow into big ones and it's time for a change.

In a bid to be more environmentally conscious, I want to reduce the carbon
footprint of the replacement car. What should I do?

To figure this out, we're going to make many approximations, because
I'm only interested in a very rough order of magnitude. Imprecise estimates
are fine, as long as I know how they're generated.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

First things first - we need to start by measuring something. It's not
perfect, but I'm going to be using CO2 emissions over the lifetime of the car.

In high school, one of my teachers claimed that a hybrid Toyota Prius was
worse for the environment than a Hummer, because the CO2 emitted for battery
production was much worse than the CO2 from the Hummer. I never bothered
checking this, but let's see if we can find some sources.

This [Guardian article](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/sep/23/carbon-footprint-new-car)
from 2010 claims that purchasing a medium-sized new car is about
17 tonnes of CO2. The [EPA greenhouse gas guidlines](https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-passenger-vehicle)
from this year estimates that a gasoline car emits about 4.6 tonnes of CO2 per year.
Now obviously we're comparing 2010 production numbers to 2020 estimates,
so it's not super accurate, but this suggests that buying a new car is worth
about 3.7 years of driving it.

Let's say a car lasts about 10 years. Taking $$3.7 / (10+3.7)$$ gives
27% of a gasoline car's emissions comes from initial production, and the
rest comes from fuel. So how do hybrid and electric car production emissions
compare to that?

The European Parliament has [an infographic](https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20200109STO69925/understanding-the-gender-pay-gap-definition-and-causes)
for CO2 emissions from different kinds of cars, from 2014.

IMAGE HERE

The green bars are the share from vehicle production, the bottom three bars
are electric cars, and the top 2 bars are gasoline cars. We see that
electric cars do pay a higher up-front cost in CO2 emissions, but eyeballing
it gives about 62.5 g CO2/km versus 50 g CO2/km - an increase of 25% in
production costs. As indicated in the chart, the lifetime emissions of the
electric car is going to depend on how the electricity is generated. Purely
coal-based electricity is worse than a gasoline car, purely renewable energy
is wildly better, and energy from an EU average gives something that's still
better than gasoline - about 220 g/km for a gasoline car, vs 170 g/km for an
electric car, as long as you drive the car for long enough.

That's just one source, but when looking through a few other sources, they
all arrive at a similar conclusion: electric cars produce more up-front
emissions, but produce less long-term emissions, assuming a 10 year lifespan.
The [Alternative Fuels Data Center](https://afdc.energy.gov/vehicles/electric_emissions.html)
from the Department of Energy has a tool that lets you estimate annual
emissions for different kinds of vehicles, with breakdowns by state.
Their estimate is that a gasoline car produces 11,435 pounds of CO2 (5.19
tonnes, more than the EPA's estimate). For the average US power grid,
a hybrid produces 6,258 pounds of CO2 annually (2.84 tonnes), and an electric car produces
4,358 pounds of CO2 annually (1.98 tonnes).

In addition, I assume these numbers are based off current electricty production.
If you expect energy to become greener in the future, or live in a state that
is more environmentally conscious, the balance tips further in favor of hybrids
and electric cars. I live in California and on average, an all electric car
produces 2,117 pounds of CO2 annually - less than half the national average, thanks
to heavier usage of solar and hydropower. I expect electricity to become greener
over time. There's enough pressure from climate protestors that I believe we're
going to see power companies do environmentally friendly things for PR reasons,
even if they don't particularly care about the environment. This is similar to
how some companies figured out that paying lip service to LGBT rights was good
PR - it's not the ideal scenario, but it's better than nothing.

Interestingly, some sources find that right now, hybrids are better for the
environment than an electric car. [CarbonBrief](https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-how-electric-vehicles-help-to-tackle-climate-change)
has some charts summarizing a few sources, showing how lifetime emissions drastically
change depending which country's power grid you use. However, if you get a car
that's partly gas-powered, tailpipe emissions are never going to drop, while
power grid emissions could drop with development of new technology.


\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Okay. So, we've established that the obvious answer of buying hybrid or electric
cars is better for the environment. This was good to check, whether or not
the final conclusion matched expectations!

