---
layout: post
title:  Pony-Scarred for Life
date:   2021-04-08 02:30:00 -0700
---

> Letting go is harder than it seems
> I still wonder if you remember me

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8JLa4X7yXQ&list=RDGMEMJQXQAmqrnmK1SEjY_rKBGA&index=4

I've really put off writing this post.

I've been watching My Little Pony for literally 10 years. **10 years.** Good lord that's
a long time. And funnily enough, I thought I would stop watching in 2019, when Friendship is Magic ended. Then
I thought I would stop watching in 2020. Then I thought I would stop in 2021...and here I am.

I've known for a long time that I wanted to write something about what My Little Pony means
to me, but I've put it off for a long time because it's hard for me to explain why.
There's a complicated grouping of emotions that's not worth conveying in full, but I wouldn't be able to
live with myself if I didn't try.

So if you find this post repetitive, I apologize. I'm taking the three blind mice approach - if
I describe the contours in different ways, maybe you'll be able to fill in the holes yourself.


How Did I Get Into My Little Pony?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Like a lot of bronies, I started in the gap between Season 1 and 2. I was still in high school,
and was attending Canada/USA Mathcamp that summer.
Ostensibly, Mathcamp is about introducing talented high school students to interesting
university level maths, but it also has a culture of student-organized events. The brony phenemenon
was in full swing, a few students were fans, and they organized a watch party. After watching a
few episodes, I started to see the appeal, and resolved to watch the remaining episodes later.

One distinct memory I have is watching "Call of the Cutie". In the MLP universe, all ponies eventually
get a cutie mark, an abstract symbol that represents that pony's special talent. (Out of
universe, it's a puberty allegory.) In the episode, Diamond Tiara and Silver Spoon make fun of
a pony for being a "blank flank", and ignoring the bullying, we thought it was a *hilarious*
insult. A camp counselor said he didn't get it, so we immediately called him a blank flank - which
sparked confusion more than anything else.

After that summer, Season 2 started out really strong, and I stuck with the show since. It had its ups
and downs, but at its core it's a wholesome, well-animated cartoon that shifts between light
slice-of-life episodes, and high-fantasy inspired adventures where the fate of the world is at
stake. Sure, it's an advertising vehicle to sell toys, but it's a well-made advertising vehicle.
It subscribes to the philosophy of "make a good show, and people will pay money for it".


The character
designs are cute, and underneath the surface level wholesomeness is a surprising level of

When I *have* answered this question, I've usually said something like "it's a wholesome,
well-animated cartoon, that shifts between funny slice-of-life and adventures where the fate of the
world is at stake. The writing doesn't always hit, but it is good on average, and the best
episodes are *really* good." That's all *true*, but the real reason I kept watching the
show was because of the brony community around it. I've been around fandom for a long time, and to
explain why I'm subscribed to a brony music label, I feel like I have to justify my feelings on
fandom in general. And *boy* is that complicated.

https://www.vox.com/2016/6/9/11890246/fandom-weird-critic-important


"Fans are Great. Fandom is Weird"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The quote above is attributed to Terry Pratchett, but I've yet to find a primary source. MLP fandom
is no different, but even for fandom, it swings pretty hard on the weird scale. In terms of how hard
the fandom goes, it's up in the Homestuck / Undertale tier. It's funny the fandom exists at all, because
it was never supposed to be that successful.

Before Friendship is Magic, I think people thought of My Little Pony as a low-quality cartoon that
was only successful because it got little girls to buy more toys. That's...probably true. I
hadn't watched any MLP prior to the Friendship is Magic reboot, but the few clips I've seen have
ranged from mediocre to aggressively insulting. Like, I feel bad for the kids who grew up on it.

Why was My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic different? Part of it is that it's a genuinely good show.
Sure, it's an advertising vehicle to sell toys, but it's a well-made advertising vehicle. The character
designs are cute in the anime way, and underneath the surface level wholesomeness is a surprising level of
worldbuilding and depth. It subscribes to the philosophy of "make a good show, and people will pay money for
it".

Sometimes, people derisively refer to something as a "kid's show". I don't think they really mean "shows where kids are
the primary demographic can't be good". What they mean by "kid's show" is a show that relies on flashy explosions, bright
colors, and crazy visuals, rather than interesting personalities, character dynamics, and clever jokes.
That isn't to say good shows can't have explosions (see: Mythbusters), but
explosions alone can't fix a broken narrative.
Characters in MLP aren't always well written (good *lord* they are not), but when they are, it creates
really excellent tension and payoff.

Fans often attribute the characters to Lauren Faust's influence as a showrunner, thanks to her prior work
on *The Powerpuff Girls* and *Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends*. It's pretty unclear how much that
matches reality, but that's the creation myth for the fandom. According to legend,
in 2010 there was a 4chan thread about Lauren Faust getting to lead
the Generation 4 My Little Pony reboot. (I've never gone looking for the thread
- my philospophy is that it's best to never directly observe 4chan.)
The thread creator is *pissed*, writing
an entire essay whose thesis was "Lauren Faust is a great showrunner that's
sold out to work on a glorified toy commercial". Lamenting the death of
animation as an art form, a few anons decide to ironically
hate-watch My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic when it comes out.
Get some free Internet points by shitting on trash. They get a few episodes in and realize, with
dawning horror, that they are changing from ironic hate-watchers to ironic fans to true fans.
Popularity spreads in 4chan. The mods have to create a /mlp/ containment board to stop MLP
discussion from crowding out the serious and dignified discussion of other cartoons. It spills
out from 4chan into the real world and soon takes on a life of its own. Lauren
Faust moved on from the show after Season 2, but by then there was no going back.

I've heard it described as a "lightning in a bottle" scenario. In most realities,
Friendship is Magic is a quietly successful cartoon that sells a bunch of toys,
sparks a bit of nostalgia, and is otherwise unremarkable. Quality is no guarantee
of fandom and virality can be hard to predict.
At the very last BronyCon, Lauren Faust came back to do a panel
with M. A. Larson, a lead writer who still tours the MLP convention circuit. In
the Q&A section, he discussed a video Lauren shared during Season 1, where a
bunch of Russian men, some dressed in military camo, were singing along to
*Winter Wrap-Up*, and although he knew something was happening, that was the
moment where he realized this was real.

https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/cezmyc/yo_reddit_im_ma_larson_writer_on_my_little_pony/eu688z7/


Okay, But Actually, Why My Little Pony?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There's a lot of theories as to why Friendship is Magic became so viral so quickly.

The premise was incredibly novel. Not the premise of the show:
the premise of the fandom. "Several 15 to 30 year old men swear up and down that the new My Little Pony
show is worth watching" was such a strange, bizarre idea that it got people to overcome their
existing aversions towards watching a cartoon marketed towards 7 year old girls. In the past
a decent fraction of bronies identified as "hipster bronies" whose enjoyment was derived
specifically because of its eclecticness.

Its aims of teaching kids how to navigate friendships and tricky social
situations were relatable to adults as well. It may have been warped by the
characters being ponies, but episodes whose morals are "don't promise your friends
too much" and "don't get jealous about your friends' good fortune" struck a chord
with adults as well. The show leaned into this towards the end of its run - in some ways
it grew up over time and started tackling problems like "don't expect a job from a
friend if you aren't any good at it", and "delegate your responsibilities if you have too
much work".

For me, I've realized that what I enjoy most is seeing how the show's canon gets expanded or
reinterpreted through fandom, and given enough time, I get equally interested in both the
original work and fandom creations.
CHECK FROM DIYANG, but fandom is driven most by untapped potential. Poorly
written episodes inspire fanfic to fix them, and worldbuilding details never fully
explained are great inspiration points for fanart. Getting people to give MLP a chance may have
been a lightning in a bottle, but once people did, Friendship is Magic was practically
hyperoptimized for fandom. Between strong characterization,
the constraints of a children's show limiting viable
storylines to G rated ones, villain backstories only getting explored for
2 episodes before their defeat, frequent allusions to world mythology, the minimally explored
history of Equestria prior to the show, and some genuinely terrible episodes, Friendship is Magic
was a veritable sandbox of options for fan content.
And once people started, fanwork is its own engine of inspiration.

The way I like to describe fan content is that it's like painting a tapestry, but instead of the standard
colors like red and blue, you get more exotic colors like Reimu or Papyrus. This makes it much harder
for other people to appreciate the art, but if you understand the references, that fan work can
convey very specific feelings or ideas that aren't doable from purely original content.
Pony-ifying everything was a bit of a meme in the early days of the fandom, and looking back,
I still have a soft spot for the [Ponycraft 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJbAT1wzS8U) and
[Shingeki no Pony](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sj4yJ4MPYA) edits.


[The Stars Will Aid in Her Escape](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdhSb-L3hf8)

In many ways, although I certainly have preferred pieces of fanwork (give Fallout Equestria and
Doctor Whooves Adventure a chance), I'm more a fan of the scene in general. When the MLP fandom does
something, it goes **hard**.
Make a voice-acted 9 hour [Ace Attorney x MLP crossover video series](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUDfoZGhLjE)?
Sure, why not. *Turnabout Storm* is slow at times, but it does a great job at capturing the tone of
Ace Attorney, and the case's resolution is excellent.
There are countless examples of fans spending tons of time making something purely for other bronies,
and although Sturgeon's Law applies, MLP fandom is uniquely prolific enough across art, music, and
animation that you can find something good in the 10% that's not trash.

If you'd prefer something shorter however, I think the best example of this insanity is
the [Lullaby for a Princess](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i7PQ9IO-7fU) animation by WarpOut.



[The Stars Will Aid in Her Escape](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdhSb-L3hf8) is still some of
the best cinematography
still hold up
 as good cinemato

https://www.wired.com/2012/01/brony-census/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150120223532/http://www.researchismagic.org/2014/04/what-sort-of-group-are-bronies/#more-520
https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2014/08/research-is-magic-an-interview-with-ethnographers-jason-nguyen-kurt-baer/



"Sometimes We're Self-Conscious About Our Stupid Sport"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the past 10 years, I've only been asked why I watch My Little Pony three times. I don't go out
of my way to mention watching the show, and when I do, my culture bubble is pretty accepting and
usually doesn't care or judge very much.

So if no one's asking about it, why do I feel the need to justify it?

> Explanations similar to Dr. Redden’s–basically, some version of the idea that the world is a rough and cynical place and that MLP presents an alternative space, no matter how delimited or constrained, that is more trusting and open–are pretty common within the fandom as part of people’s personal narratives for why and how they became bronies (obviously, this is not true for everyone, but it’s clearly a fandom trope) [...]
> But there are many others who narrate their experience as simply watching a show that they like–just like any other show–and, to their surprise finding outside resistance. Indeed, we don’t expect people to explain their affinity for most elements of popular culture. You need not justify why you watch “Breaking Bad” or “Game of Thrones.”

The above is from [an interview with two ethnographers](https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2014/08/research-is-magic-an-interview-with-ethnographers-jason-nguyen-kurt-baer/) that studied brony culture.
(Ethnographer is the formal term for someone who studies and documents a culture, often while participating in that culture themselves to get an authentic
view of what it's like for insiders - which is why they have pony OCs.)
If you're interested in the origins of the fandom, I think most of their analysis is correct.

My 10th grade history teacher said that every culture creates its counterculture. Bronies are
no different. Between how easy it was to make fun of watching MLP, and the adjacency to furries (the
other laughing stock of the Internet in the early 2010s), bronies got a lot of hate.
There are many, many articles (usually written by bronies) that try to explain why liking Friendship
is Magic isn't weird, and I feel this is arguing from the wrong direction. Remember the rule:
FiM fans are great, FiM *fandom* is weird. There are very few objective criteria that explain why
it isn't weird to go crazy about a 5 second background cameo of a grey pegasus that didn't even say
anything, that explain why everything has to be "brohoof" or "welcome to the herd". These are not
things that come from the show - they are things that come from the fans surrounding the show, and
they are *weird*.

The distinction is not whether bronies are weird, because they are. It's not whether they deserve to be
made fun of, because they do. It's about whether they deserve to be the subject of hate, bad-natured
humor, and punch down comedy. Most fandoms are islands of misfit toys. Look closely enough at any of them,
and you'll find some truly messed up things.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-DoaUyMGPWI

1:24:33

(quote here)

Felix's comments were eerily reminiscent of the brony fandom. Pastel colored ponies and MMA
fighters were so far apart that they met at the point at infinity. If every MMA fan has tried to
convert people before realizing that a fighter advertising Condom Depot is a weird look, then
every MLP fan has shown an episode to a begrudging friend who is watching more out of friendship
rather than true interest. Maybe there is artistry in the animation or the fighting, but the
trappings around it are only special to cultural insiders, and to everyone else they're just
strange and unfamiliar.

On its surface, the


saying you were brony was a huge
signal for "open to new experience + little respect for gender norms"



The MLP fandom
is male dominated (roughly 80% male based on census surveys), and some identify as "closet bronies" out of
fear of what might happen if they say they like My Little Pony.

But they like the show, it's part of
who they *are*.

A decent fraction of male bronies
had internal struggles about whether it was okay for them to enjoy a 

>
> The fact that causal explanations that answer why you are a brony are central to the narratives of many bronies does not really indicate too much about their truth value, but they are a useful indicator of where society draws its lines and how people who find themselves on the wrong sides of social lines create meaning based on their situations.



Backlash
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your Words Have No Power
---------------------------------------------------------------

And similarly, it shouldn't be surprising that self-secure bronies would take that backlash or
contradiction and wear it as a source of pride.
There is a grand tradition of groups taking slurs and adopting them for themselves. ["Queer"](https://www.cjr.org/language_corner/queer.php)
used to be used in contempt. Now it's part of the LGBTQ acronym. There aren't really similar slurs
for the brony community, but there is a similar level of hate, and I'd say many bronies (myself included)
felt a sense of strength in numbers.

> The kids, when they like something on the Internet, they call themselves the trash of the thing.

[(Source)](https://youtu.be/6oQyCFOyRcA?t=14)
{: .centered }


Mihaela Popa-Wyatt [has written some essays about times groups repurpose slurs](https://philarchive.org/archive/POPRTB).
The theory is that slurs are way to assign low power to a group. (You do not deserve to be named the way
you want to be.) When a group reclaims a slur and uses it to self-label themselves, it disarms the attack




Why My Little Pony, Friendship is Magic
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Friendship is Magic is not a perfect show. Hoooo boy does it have flaws. But it's a guilty pleasure that's
fun once you get into it.

The show is primarily a slice of life show that's light on continuity. Some members of the Mane 6 (NAMES) get into a situation,
supported by side characters, and hijinks ensue. They all have strengths and flaws, and when written
well, the ponies bounce off each other and are really entertaining or touching. It's not just
stuff like "let's go to the store!", there are real conflicts and resolutions. Especially in the
later seasons, these conflicts can be very relatable to adults. For example, there's an episode
about a pony who started dating a single mom. The mom has a daughter, and she hates him - the episode
is about him trying to find a way to relate to her. That's a more extreme example, but there are
others like that.

Every now and then (usually around the season premiere and finale), the show drops the slice of life,
and turns into a high stakes adventure where the fate of the world is at stake. This tends to be
heavier on continuity, involves a lot more fighting and power of friendship speeches, and basically
turns into a magical girl anime. But you know, with ponies.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Things to cover:

* MLP fan music scene
* mandarinorange PMVs / SimGretina, people leaving the community out of shame or bad feelings, pony archive project.
* "hey follow my new work"
* Tension between people creating overt pony references and pony inspired work.
* "At least we're still relevant enough to be made fun of"
* The way in which peope took degeneracy / the disgust of others as a point of pride, that other
 people didn't "get it".
* The whole "join the herd" and the whoe cult-like obsessions (but the joke is that most people
are in the joke)
* The occasional alt-right tendencies, and how this is most exaggerated at the conventions which
are the most concentrated form of people who don't fit into society (whether through neurodivergence,
not knowing how to relate to people, etc.)
* "Fandoms don't die, they just slow down"
* The shift from hipster-ism to just treating it as a normal thing.
* Big fish in a small pond, vanity pond, fighting for clout, Phil Fish video.
* PonyTown, PonyFest concert.
* Fandom as a means of escapism from a cruel world (for people who don't find something in the world that gives them meaning, fan work can create its own meaning.)
* Is Fandom good/bad? My sense is that it's at times distasteful and weird, but is less destructive than
other things - it is better than it meant something, even if it ended in pain, rather than not meaning
anything at all. As for whether one fandom is better or worse than another one, that depends on if you can
live with its ethos.
* Accepting a label with all its baggage. "i'm not a brony, but I watch MLP", "i'm not a furry but I
understand why some people are", etc.

Things I want to work up to:

A lot of brony conventions run BronyPalooza, a concert series where musicians in the fandom play music. Usually,
they don't even play showtunes. At best they play songs that have MLP inspiration, but which wouldn't be out
of place on a generic indie music album. Because pony is what brought people together, but it's not the reason
everyone stays.

Usually, these events suck. You get a bunch of awkward dancers, in a room that's far too big, and no one's brave
enough to dance. The BronyPalooza at the last BronyCon? The Last Ride? It was *lit*. It was packed at 2 AM, and if
it weren't for the MLP visuals and person waving a full size Equestrian flag, it wouldn't be out of place from
a run-of-the-mill nightclub.

Behind me is an impromptu conga line, and the person at the end of it yells "Come on, JOIN US! IT'S OKAY! We're
all retarded." Between the insane circumstances, and the casual self-directed use of "retard" in the year 2019, I'm
not sure I could give a better summary of the MLP community.

\* \* \*

Extremism tends to attract extremism. Not because they seek each other, but because by definition, the extremists have
a hard time in normal social circles. There is a reason some people use "normies" as a slur, and if all the low-openness
people get weirded out, only the weird ones are left - and yes, that sometimes means Black Lives Matters and Blue Lives
Matters folk live under the same umbrella of MLP fandom, each blissfully unaware of the others politics until things come
to a head.

I've seen it all. Aggressively nonbinary and transgender people finding solace in changelings (a race of shapeshifters)
and criticizing anyone to the right of Bernie Sanders.
People trying to defend an OC of white supremacy by saying "it's just an edgy joke", and then immediately lamenting that
the fandom has actual white supremecists (without realizing that sometimes it's not worth joking about some things).

Sure, a lot of us are a little self-conscious about our dumb fandom. But if people are going to make fun of us, we want
them to make fun of us for liking a show about ponies.

Equestria Daily does a reasonably frequent call-out of when other media references MLP or the brony subculture. They once
talked about (CHECK THIS) the Teen Titans Go! movie, where a brony was portrayed as an obese white man that was clearly
meant to be read as a loser. EQD's commentary was "at least we're still relevant enough to be made fun of".

I've thought about those words a lot. I feel I see echos of that everywhere. Felix (LAST NAME), talking about being an
MMA fan, and how they couldn't explain how the magic of the octagon gave disaffected men an arena where real heroics
and villainy could happen, outside the confines of a brutal corporation society. A Smash documentary, where a commentator
talks about how Melee locals are their churches, and a former pro talks about how they didn't find themselves in Smash, but
they found a second self in Smash. A documentary on Phil Fish, a notoriously controversial indie game developer, looking
at the reshare counts of an article he's in, saying "I don't know why I care so much".

I feel like everyone's looking for community, or meaning, or just *something*, *anything* that helps cure their
existentialism, and if that comes from horse conventions? Well, it's weird...but I'm not sure I can say it's bad. Fandom
is the engine that creates meaning, and more meaning seems better than none.

\* \* \*

You run into problems when you meet the people whose entire identity is wrapped up in a single subculture. That's how
you get people planning real-life power outages to disrupt an EVE Online clan. A person calling another a wanna-be
dictator for blocking people they don't like on Twitter. The infamous Steven Universe fandom incident. So on and so forth.
It would be easy to lay this at the feet of certain fandoms, but the problem is more of intensity rather than source
material, and intensity tends to wane over time. The crazy Homestuck fans moved to MLP, and then to Steven Universe,
and then to Undertale and then to Hazbin Hotel and then...well, I think I'm getting too old to spectate them anymore,
but I heard The Owl House is getting some buzz.

In some ways, I'm actually kinda happy the fandom slowed down. Sure, there's less content, and it's less fun watching
creators leave every year, but the people left are a bit older and more self-aware that none of this *actually* matters.
It was fun watching someone set up a "your waifu is trash, change my mind" table, or seeing the shrine of discarded
MLP toys grow larger and larger over the course of BronyCon, and watching the fandom get less acrimonious about
content creators moving on to other things.
