---
layout: post
title:  "Why Don't I Have Ads?"
date:   2021-07-03 16:09:00 -0700
---

Why doesn't this blog have ads?
Well, the answer's pretty simple: zt my current view count, it isn't worth it. And I don't mean that it's not worth the
time I'd spend setting it up. I mean that if someone offered to do it for free,
I would still turn them down.

Let's make a very rough [Fermi estimation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermi_problem)
of how much revenue I could get. Google Analytics says I get about 5000 sessions
per month. According to [this blog](https://blog.taboola.com/how-much-do-websites-make-from-ads/),
the clickthrough rate of display ads is 0.05%, but is 8.8x higher for native ads. Let's
be optimistic and say it's 10x, so 0.5% clickthrough. Average cost per click is $0.58.
In total, the optimistic estimate is:

$$
    5000 \times 0.5\% \times \$1 = \$14.50
$$

about $14.50 a month. And sure, that's some potential money. However, ads also come at a cost
to readership. Based on [analysis by Gwern](https://www.gwern.net/Ads), running ads drops views
by about 10%, and a drop of that size has been replicated independently across several
organizations.

So really, the question is, would I rather earn an extra $14.50 a month, or would I rather
have 500 more readers? Seems pretty clearly in favor of the readers side to me.

\* \* \*

If finance has taught me anything, it's that you can always take the inverse of a bet. If
I value 500 readers more than $14.50 a month, why don't I run ads myself to get more readers?

On one hand, I want to say this is dumb, and stupid, and I shouldn't.
On the other hand, I'm having a hard time coming up with a counterargument.
It wouldn't affect the reader experience, because my site's content wouldn't change.
I do care about viewership stats. I could even claim the AdWords credit that
Google Analytics keeps pushing me to take.

I've thought about it a lot more than this post would suggest, and I think the main problem
is that I don't know how I would even structure the ads - what it would look like, and
where I would place it. Normally, people are trying to sell a product. which lets you create
a clear ad for that product. The "product" of this blog is the writing, which deliberately
has no topic focus besides "the things Alex wants to write about". Therefore, I don't have a
clear search query in mind that I'd want to run ads for. Anyone who searches my name will
find my website pretty quickly anyways (the benefits of having a novel last name). I would
also be worried about follow-on effects where a reader might treat the site differently if
they clicked through from a sponsored link, rather than a native search result. As for a
banner ad, I'm not even sure what image would make sense for a personal blog. It's kind
of like asking for a picture that summarizes your entire life - it doesn't exist.

I don't think I've ever seen anyone run ads for a personal blog before, so to me that
indicates it probably doesn't make sense. Open to the idea though!
