---
layout: post
title:  Pony-Scarred for Life
date:   2021-12-23 02:30:00 -0700
---

> Letting go is harder than it seems
> I still wonder if you remember me

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8JLa4X7yXQ&list=RDGMEMJQXQAmqrnmK1SEjY_rKBGA&index=4

I've really put off writing this post.

I've been watching My Little Pony for literally 10 years. **10 years.** Good lord that's
a long time. And funnily enough, I thought I would stop watching in 2019, when Friendship is Magic ended. Then
I thought I would stop watching in 2020. Then I thought I would stop in 2021...and here I am.

I've known for a long time that I wanted to write something about what My Little Pony means
to me, but I've put it off for a long time because it's hard for me to explain why.
There's a complicated grouping of emotions that's not worth conveying in full, but I wouldn't be able to
live with myself if I didn't try.

So if you find this post repetitive, I apologize. I'm taking the three blind mice approach - if
I describe the contours in different ways, maybe you'll be able to fill in the holes yourself.


How Did I Get Into My Little Pony?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Like a lot of bronies, I started in the gap between Season 1 and 2. I was still in high school,
and was attending Canada/USA Mathcamp that summer.
Ostensibly, Mathcamp is about introducing talented high school students to interesting
university level maths, but it also has a culture of student-organized events. The brony phenemenon
was in full swing, a few students were fans, and they organized a watch party. After watching a
few episodes, I started to see the appeal, and resolved to watch the remaining episodes later.

One distinct memory I have is watching "Call of the Cutie". In the MLP universe, all ponies eventually
get a cutie mark, an abstract symbol that represents that pony's special talent. (Out of
universe, it's a puberty allegory.) In the episode, Diamond Tiara and Silver Spoon make fun of
a pony for being a "blank flank", and ignoring the bullying, we thought it was a *hilarious*
insult. A camp counselor said he didn't get it, so we immediately called him a blank flank - which
sparked confusion more than anything else.

After that summer, Season 2 started out really strong, and I stuck with the show since. It had its ups
and downs, but at its core it's a wholesome, well-animated cartoon that shifts between light
slice-of-life episodes, and high-fantasy inspired adventures where the fate of the world is at
stake. The characters have fun personalities, they play off each other well, and then occasionally it
turns into a magical girl anime with big laser beam fights. And, there's a bunch of worldbuilding
and lore if you go looking for it.
What's not to like?
Sure, it's an advertising vehicle to sell toys, but it's a well-made advertising vehicle.
It subscribes to the philosophy of "make a good show, and people will pay money for it".

That's how I got into it. But how did other people get into it?


Let's Take it From the Top, One More Time
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before Friendship is Magic, I think most people thought My Little Pony was a trash-quality cartoon whose
success was thanks to pandering to little girls so that their parents would buy more toys. That's...probably
true. The few clips I've seen of previous generations have ranged from mediocre to so awful that I feel
bad for the kids who grew up with it.

People will sometimes derisively refer to something as a "kid's show", and when they do, I don't think
they mean "shows where kids are the primary demographic can't be good".
What they mean by "kid's show" is a show that relies on flashy explosions, bright
colors, and crazy visuals, rather than interesting personalities, interpersonal conflicts, and clever jokes.
That isn't to say good shows can't have explosions (see: Mythbusters), but explosions alone can't fix a broken narrative.

Episodes in Friendship is Magic have varying quality, but the well-written episodes are *really* good.
The meme in the fandom is that this is all thanks to Lauren Faust's influence as a showrunner.
According to legend, in 2010 some 4chan users learned Lauren Faust was leading an upcoming MLP
reboot. They were *pissed*, because they liked Lauren Faust's other cartoons, and were upset that
she "sold out" to work for Hasbro's corporate overlords.
Lamenting the death of animation as an art form, they decide to ironically
hate-watch My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic when it comes out to get some free Internet
points by shitting on trash. They get a few episodes in and realize, with
dawning horror, that the show's actually wholesome without overdoing the cuteness. Popularity
spreads in 4chan, to the point that 4chan mods have to create a /mlp/ containment board.
(I can only imagine the discussion they must have had, that they needed to stop MLP from
polluting the serious and dignified discussion of other cartoons.)

I've heard it described as a "lightning in a bottle" scenario. In most realities,
Friendship is Magic is a quietly successful cartoon that sells a bunch of toys, but otherwise
leaves no mark on pop culture. And this is true of entertainment in general. Cass Sunstein has
done research into what becomes popular, based on the real-life example of an artist who
was only popular in South Africa. Quality helps a fandom spread, but it still needs a seed population
to get the ball rolling. 4chan was that start point, and once it got going, the premise
was novel enough to pul in more people. Not the premise of the show: the premise of the
*fandom*.
"Several 15 to 30 year old men swear up and down that the new My Little Pony
show is worth watching" was such a strange, bizarre idea that it got people to overcome their
existing aversions towards watching a girls cartoon. The only reason I gave it a chance was because
I was into Homestuck at the time, and MLP profile pics and references were starting to leak into
the MSPA forums.

Even then, people's reasons for calling themselves a brony varied a lot. Some liked the show,
Some said it was all "ironic". Some were okay saying it wasn't ironic, but were watching just so they
could be hipsters and revel in eclecticness. Brony
culture was and is complicated, but its growing popularity was getting hard to ignore.

Lauren Faust moved on from the show after Season 2, but for the very last BronyCon, she and
M. A. Larson did a retrospective panl, and in the Q&A section, they talked about the moment
they knew the brony fandom was for real - the writers were watching a video of Russian men,
some in military camo, singing along to *Winter Wrap-Up*.

https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/cezmyc/yo_reddit_im_ma_larson_writer_on_my_little_pony/eu688z7/

My Little Pony was a fad, and I joined when it was at its peak - so why did I stick around, long
after most people stopped watching?


"Fans are Great. Fandom is Weird"
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(This quote is attributed to Terry Pratchett, but I haven't found a primary source.)

Even for fandom, MLP fandom swings pretty hard on the weird scale. And, look, I mean this
in the least judgmental way possible, but I've been in the Touhou and Homestuck fandoms
before. Let's say I have a *pretty calibrated* sense of how weird fandoms can be, and leave it
at that.

So, first of all - what does "weird" even mean here? Roughly, I mean something that's hard to explain
to a cultural outsider. The harder it is to explain, the weirder it is. Cosplay? Not that weird, it's
like a Halloween costume. Cosplaying as a bag of trash? More weird. Fan of LeBron James? Not weird
at all. If anything, people would say you're too basic. Fan of [Lee "Flash" Young-ho](https://liquipedia.net/starcraft2/Flash)?
Well, if you're talking to the average person, you're going to need to unpack that a bit.

You might point out this is a very subjective definition, but weird is inherently a subjective
concept! If you only live your life within a narrow cultural niche, your notion of "weird" is
going to be very different from someone else's. At the same time, I think you can define some
base level of weirdness against mainstream culture, and in that respect, a lot of fandoms
are weird and My Little Pony especially so.

For me, I've realized that I put a lot of respect on people who take the joke seriously. Who
take a nonsense idea with minimal usefulness to the real world, and just run with it to completion
because they want to. Most fan creations are just that - lots of work, invested into something
that's only appealing to fans familiar with the source material, with minimal commercial viability
thanks to copyright issues. From the start, the brony fandom has been an especially creative one,
and after I got into it, I derived a lot of enjoyment from seeing the different ways
people expand or reinterpret the show's canon.

CHECK FROM DIYANG, but fandom is driven most by untapped potential. In this respect,
Friendship is Magic was almost hyperoptimized for fandom. Since it's a children's show, there's
strong constraints on the storylines the writers can do. When Hasbro wants to make a new toy line,
the writers have to write it into the show, whether they want to or not, and when it isn't
done gracefully fan artists can try to pick up the pieces. The ensemble cast made it easy for
fans to latch onto a "best pony". The show hints at the broader world of Equestria, as well as
world history prior to the show, without every explaining it because it doesn't serve the plot.
And sometimes, the writers just suck and put out a bad episode. You couldn't ask for a
better sandbox.

The way I like to describe fan content is that it's like painting a tapestry, but instead of the standard
colors like red and blue, you get more exotic colors like Reimu or Papyrus. This makes it much harder
for other people to appreciate the art, but if you understand the references, that fan work can
convey very specific feelings or ideas that aren't doable from purely original content.
Pony-ifying everything was a bit of a meme in the early days of the fandom, and looking back,
I still have a soft spot for the [Ponycraft 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JJbAT1wzS8U) and
[Shingeki no Pony](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3sj4yJ4MPYA) edits.


[The Stars Will Aid in Her Escape](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdhSb-L3hf8)

In many ways, although I certainly have preferred pieces of fanwork (give Fallout Equestria and
Doctor Whooves Adventure a chance), I'm more a fan of the scene in general. When the MLP fandom does
something, it goes **hard**.
Make a voice-acted 9 hour [Ace Attorney x MLP crossover video series](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUDfoZGhLjE)?
Sure, why not. *Turnabout Storm* is slow at times, but it does a great job at capturing the tone of
Ace Attorney, and the case's resolution is excellent.
There are countless examples of fans spending tons of time making something purely for other bronies,
and although Sturgeon's Law applies, MLP fandom is uniquely prolific enough that you can find something
good.

If you'd prefer something shorter however, I think the best example of this insanity is
the [Lullaby for a Princess](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i7PQ9IO-7fU) animation by WarpOut.

[The Stars Will Aid in Her Escape](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdhSb-L3hf8) is still some of
the best cinematography
still hold up
 as good cinemato

https://www.wired.com/2012/01/brony-census/
https://web.archive.org/web/20150120223532/http://www.researchismagic.org/2014/04/what-sort-of-group-are-bronies/#more-520
https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2014/08/research-is-magic-an-interview-with-ethnographers-jason-nguyen-kurt-baer/



"Sometimes We're Self-Conscious About Our Stupid Sport"
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The brony fandom is nowhere near as big as it was in 2010-2013. People often describe that as a
golden age, and it's never hit those same heights since.

You could try to blame it on Season 3, which was controversial and is often near the bottom of
"best season" polls. Or you could blame the shifts in the show's tone. Those are both true, but
I think it's more like what happened with Pokemon Go. For a short time, the world collectively
had a fever dream and got in on the hype, and when the cracks emerged, the world moved on.

https://www.equestriadaily.com/2018/12/poll-results-what-is-best-season-of-my.html

I've thought about this a lot over the years. Funnily enough, I found an explanation from an
unlikely source: MMA.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-DoaUyMGPWI

1:24:33

(quote here)

Felix's comments were eerily reminiscent of the brony fandom. Pastel colored ponies and MMA
fighters were so far apart that they met at the point at infinity. If every MMA fan has tried to
convert people before realizing that a fighter advertising Condom Depot is a weird look, then
every MLP fan has shown an episode to a begrudging friend who is watching more out of friendship
rather than true interest. Maybe there is artistry in the animation or the fighting, but the
trappings around it are only special to cultural insiders, and to everyone else they're strange
enough that watching is harder than looking away.

If there's a real insecurity in MMA fans, there's a similar one in bronies. If you look for it,
you'll find tons of brony thinkpieces examining why people won't give the show a chance, why
bronies are often the butt of the joke, and how to help others deal with the comically easy
bullying they might face. I've only been asked why I watch MLP three times in the past 10 years,
thanks to living in a pretty accepting culture bubble, and even then I still don't feel like I have good
answer for why I invested so mich time into this fandom. There are standard cures - make fun of
yourself, call yourself trash, and move on.

> The kids, when they like something on the Internet, they call themselves the trash of the thing.

[(Source)](https://youtu.be/6oQyCFOyRcA?t=14)
{: .centered }

Mihaela Popa-Wyatt [has written papers about how groups repurpose slurs as identities](https://philarchive.org/archive/POPRTB).
The idea is that people use slurs as a power move, so when a group reclaims a slur to self-label
themselves, it disarms the power move. You calling us trash means nothing if we already call ourselves
trash. WallStreetBets calls themselves autists, some Trump supporters called themselves "deplorables"
during the 2016 election. The [list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reappropriation) goes on.
Reappropriation helps soothe the sting, but it never cures it entirely.

The best answer I can give, is that I'm here because other people are here, and together, we've created
a strange cathedral of horses and magic that needs someone to bear witness.

I'veDuring 2019, I spent much of my free time working on a My Little Pony themed puzzlehunt. I have a timetracker for this,
and found I spent XXX hours on this. ForFor an event I was panning to run for free, that would be appreciated by very
few people.
It stressed me out, cost me sleep, and by the end I was down about $100 on server costs.

I once knew someone who was writing a book, and
they observed that when they talked to non-authors, they'd say "Congrats, good luck!", whereas
already-published authors would say "Oh no, I'm so sorry, how's it going?" So, if you ask me
*why*? I had to. That's just the way it is.

The brony fandom isn't separate from reality. It's more like...like an exaggeration of reality.
You've got your drama, your weirdos you'd never want to hang out with, content creators that are
shitty when you get to meet them, content creators that are as cool as you hoped they'd be,
clout chasers fighting for wahtever meager status they can wring out of pony stardom because that's all they've got,
memes galore. All circling pony, all equally inextricable, and at the end of the day we acknowledge none of it's real and go back to something will  with more tangibility.

The experiences were real, and the cathedrals we made were important to us, even if only because we imbued them with meaning
by looking too closely at something that truthfully wasn't that complicated.

In mid-2020, during the depths of the pandemic, I watched the 6-part Seattle Mariners documentary by Secret Base. Despite having
no interest in baseball, I got drawn into the story of the Mariners, a team that has hit the highest highs (most wins
in a Major League Baseball seasons), and the lowest lows (only team to never play in a World Series, longest
active playoff drought). They're often called the most tragic team in baseball. Yet despite this, they have fans, legends,
and heroes.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TIgK56cAjfY&t=8356s

2:25:09
2:45:00

> The Mariners aren't special on account of their lack of success, it's just that success is entirely irrelevant. We've
> entered another realm here, one that's far larger and doesn't operate on the dead currency of winning and losing. Unless
> you let those limits go, you're an astronaut who brought your wallet. The Seattle Mariners aren't competitors. They're
> protagonists.
>
> With the benefit of hindsight, we know that on-field contention wasn't in the cards for the Seattle
> Mariners, and has never been to this day. That was never happening. The only fight left was for happiness.
>
> [After last at-bat of the 2009 season], teammates threw Ichiro and Junior up on their shoulders and paraded them back to
> the dugout. [...] You're looking right now at a team that isn't going to the playoffs. They didn't even really come close,
> but they're getting a standing ovation and waving their caps in gratitude. This is Whoville! I have never ever seen another
> team do this. This team and these fans aren't celebrating any kind of on-field accomplishment. They're celebrating one another.
> They're celebrating themselves.



> Explanations similar to Dr. Redden’s–basically, some version of the idea that the world is a rough and cynical place and that MLP presents an alternative space, no matter how delimited or constrained, that is more trusting and open–are pretty common within the fandom as part of people’s personal narratives for why and how they became bronies (obviously, this is not true for everyone, but it’s clearly a fandom trope) [...]
> But there are many others who narrate their experience as simply watching a show that they like–just like any other show–and, to their surprise finding outside resistance. Indeed, we don’t expect people to explain their affinity for most elements of popular culture. You need not justify why you watch “Breaking Bad” or “Game of Thrones.”

The above is from [an interview with two ethnographers](https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2014/08/research-is-magic-an-interview-with-ethnographers-jason-nguyen-kurt-baer/) that studied brony culture.
(Ethnographer is the formal term for someone who studies and documents a culture, often while participating in that culture themselves to get an authentic
view of what it's like for insiders - which is why they have pony OCs.)
If you're interested in the origins of the fandom, I think most of their analysis is correct.

My 10th grade history teacher said that every culture creates its counterculture. Bronies are
no different. Between how easy it was to make fun of watching MLP, and the adjacency to furries (the
other laughing stock of the Internet in the early 2010s), bronies got a lot of hate.
There are many, many articles (usually written by bronies) that try to explain why liking Friendship
is Magic isn't weird, and I feel this is arguing from the wrong direction. Remember the rule:
FiM fans are great, FiM *fandom* is weird. There are very few objective criteria that explain why
it isn't weird to go crazy about a 5 second background cameo of a grey pegasus that didn't even say
anything, that explain why everything has to be "brohoof" or "welcome to the herd". These are not
things that come from the show - they are things that come from the fans surrounding the show, and
they are *weird*.

The distinction is not whether bronies are weird, because they are. It's not whether they deserve to be
made fun of, because they do. It's about whether they deserve to be the subject of hate, bad-natured
humor, and punch down comedy. Most fandoms are islands of misfit toys. Look closely enough at any of them,
and you'll find some truly messed up things.

The MLP fandom
is male dominated (roughly 80% male based on census surveys), and some identify as "closet bronies" out of
fear of what might happen if they say they like My Little Pony.

But they like the show, it's part of
who they *are*.

A decent fraction of male bronies
had internal struggles about whether it was okay for them to enjoy a 

> The fact that causal explanations that answer why you are a brony are central to the narratives of many bronies does not really indicate too much about their truth value, but they are a useful indicator of where society draws its lines and how people who find themselves on the wrong sides of social lines create meaning based on their situations.



Why My Little Pony, Friendship is Magic
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Friendship is Magic is not a perfect show. Hoooo boy does it have flaws. But it's a guilty pleasure that's
fun once you get into it.

The show is primarily a slice of life show that's light on continuity. Some members of the Mane 6 (NAMES) get into a situation,
supported by side characters, and hijinks ensue. They all have strengths and flaws, and when written
well, the ponies bounce off each other and are really entertaining or touching. It's not just
stuff like "let's go to the store!", there are real conflicts and resolutions. Especially in the
later seasons, these conflicts can be very relatable to adults. For example, there's an episode
about a pony who started dating a single mom. The mom has a daughter, and she hates him - the episode
is about him trying to find a way to relate to her. That's a more extreme example, but there are
others like that.

Every now and then (usually around the season premiere and finale), the show drops the slice of life,
and turns into a high stakes adventure where the fate of the world is at stake. This tends to be
heavier on continuity, involves a lot more fighting and power of friendship speeches, and basically
turns into a magical girl anime. But you know, with ponies.


"Our Cabinet's Fractured Into Factions"
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

https://xkcd.com/1095/



\* \* \*
{: .centered }

Things to cover:

* MLP fan music scene
* mandarinorange PMVs / SimGretina, people leaving the community out of shame or bad feelings, pony archive project.
* "hey follow my new work"
* Tension between people creating overt pony references and pony inspired work.
* "At least we're still relevant enough to be made fun of"
* The way in which peope took degeneracy / the disgust of others as a point of pride, that other
 people didn't "get it".
* The whole "join the herd" and the whoe cult-like obsessions (but the joke is that most people
are in the joke)
* The occasional alt-right tendencies, and how this is most exaggerated at the conventions which
are the most concentrated form of people who don't fit into society (whether through neurodivergence,
not knowing how to relate to people, etc.)
* "Fandoms don't die, they just slow down"
* The shift from hipster-ism to just treating it as a normal thing.
* Big fish in a small pond, vanity pond, fighting for clout, Phil Fish video.
* PonyTown, PonyFest concert.
* Fandom as a means of escapism from a cruel world (for people who don't find something in the world that gives them meaning, fan work can create its own meaning.)
* Is Fandom good/bad? My sense is that it's at times distasteful and weird, but is less destructive than
other things - it is better than it meant something, even if it ended in pain, rather than not meaning
anything at all. As for whether one fandom is better or worse than another one, that depends on if you can
live with its ethos.
* Accepting a label with all its baggage. "i'm not a brony, but I watch MLP", "i'm not a furry but I
understand why some people are", etc.

Things I want to work up to:

A lot of brony conventions run BronyPalooza, a concert series where musicians in the fandom play music. Usually,
they don't even play showtunes. At best they play songs that have MLP inspiration, but which wouldn't be out
of place on a generic indie music album. Because pony is what brought people together, but it's not the reason
everyone stays.

Usually, these events suck. You get a bunch of awkward dancers, in a room that's far too big, and no one's brave
enough to dance. The BronyPalooza at the last BronyCon? The Last Ride? It was *lit*. It was packed at 2 AM, and if
it weren't for the MLP visuals and person waving a full size Equestrian flag, it wouldn't be out of place from
a run-of-the-mill nightclub.

Behind me is an impromptu conga line, and the person at the end of it yells "Come on, JOIN US! IT'S OKAY! We're
all retarded." Between the insane circumstances, and the casual self-directed use of "retard" in the year 2019, I'm
not sure I could give a better summary of the MLP community.

\* \* \*

Extremism tends to attract extremism. Not because they seek each other, but because by definition, the extremists have
a hard time in normal social circles. There is a reason some people use "normies" as a slur, and if all the low-openness
people get weirded out, only the weird ones are left - and yes, that sometimes means Black Lives Matters and Blue Lives
Matters folk live under the same umbrella of MLP fandom, each blissfully unaware of the others politics until things come
to a head.

I've seen it all. Aggressively nonbinary and transgender people finding solace in changelings (a race of shapeshifters)
and criticizing anyone to the right of Bernie Sanders.
People trying to defend an OC of white supremacy by saying "it's just an edgy joke", and then immediately lamenting that
the fandom has actual white supremecists (without realizing that sometimes it's not worth joking about some things).

Sure, a lot of us are a little self-conscious about our dumb fandom. But if people are going to make fun of us, we want
them to make fun of us for liking a show about ponies.

Equestria Daily does a reasonably frequent call-out of when other media references MLP or the brony subculture. They once
talked about (CHECK THIS) the Teen Titans Go! movie, where a brony was portrayed as an obese white man that was clearly
meant to be read as a loser. EQD's commentary was "at least we're still relevant enough to be made fun of".

I've thought about those words a lot. I feel I see echos of that everywhere. Felix (LAST NAME), talking about being an
MMA fan, and how they couldn't explain how the magic of the octagon gave disaffected men an arena where real heroics
and villainy could happen, outside the confines of a brutal corporation society. A Smash documentary, where a commentator
talks about how Melee locals are their churches, and a former pro talks about how they didn't find themselves in Smash, but
they found a second self in Smash. A documentary on Phil Fish, a notoriously controversial indie game developer, looking
at the reshare counts of an article he's in, saying "I don't know why I care so much".

I feel like everyone's looking for community, or meaning, or just *something*, *anything* that helps cure their
existentialism, and if that comes from horse conventions? Well, it's weird...but I'm not sure I can say it's bad. Fandom
is the engine that creates meaning, and more meaning seems better than none.

\* \* \*

You run into problems when you meet the people whose entire identity is wrapped up in a single subculture. That's how
you get people planning real-life power outages to disrupt an EVE Online clan. A person calling another a wanna-be
dictator for blocking people they don't like on Twitter. The infamous Steven Universe fandom incident. So on and so forth.
It would be easy to lay this at the feet of certain fandoms, but the problem is more of intensity rather than source
material, and intensity tends to wane over time. The crazy Homestuck fans moved to MLP, and then to Steven Universe,
and then to Undertale and then to Hazbin Hotel and then...well, I think I'm getting too old to spectate them anymore,
but I heard The Owl House is getting some buzz.

In some ways, I'm actually kinda happy the fandom slowed down. Sure, there's less content, and it's less fun watching
creators leave every year, but the people left are a bit older and more self-aware that none of this *actually* matters.
It was fun watching someone set up a "your waifu is trash, change my mind" table, or seeing the shrine of discarded
MLP toys grow larger and larger over the course of BronyCon, and watching the fandom get less acrimonious about
content creators moving on to other things.


Outline
--------------------------------------------------------------------

* How I got into MLP.
* What I found interesting about it at the time.
* Some discussion on what other people found interesting about it.
* The ocean of fan content.
* Why does it still exist?


Cut Sections
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
