---
layout: post
title:  "A Prelude to the Inevitable Long Post About MIT Mystery Hunt 2023"
date:   2023-01-17 02:17:00 -0700
---

The first puzzle I ever wrote for a puzzlehunt was Mystery Hunt 2013. I had joined
Manic Sages in 2012 out of the Canada/USA Mathcamp pipeline, they won that year,
and I figured, hey, I'll help write, why not. Writing sounds fun! I helped out on
two puzzles. One was [good](https://puzzles.mit.edu/2013/coinheist.com/indiana/snow_day/index.html)
and the other was [bad](https://puzzles.mit.edu/2013/coinheist.com/indiana/houston_we_have_liftoff/index.html).

I did about zero work outside of those puzzles, aside from testsolving
[Infinite Cryptogram](https://puzzles.mit.edu/2013/coinheist.com/sneakers/infinite_cryptogram/index.html).
It took me 9 hours over the course of a week.
I remember leaving feedback that it seemed long, but I had fun, and figured
it would take a "real programmer" a lot less time. I had just started college and wasn't
even 18 yet. Surely the real hunters would do better!

During MLK weekend, I didn't fly into HQ (convincing my parents to let me
do that didn't seem possible), but I helped man answer callbacks from my dorm room.
As I called back with more "your answer is incorrect" calls, I could tell things were
not going as planned.

People didn't really realize what social media *was* in 2013, and that included me.
I remember refreshing the #MysteryHunt hashtag a lot. I saw the "One does not
simply solve MIT Mystery Hunt 2013" meme created during hunt. In those days, the norm
was not to avoid social media during a puzzlehunt. There were many tweets made live
during hunt, almost never spoilery, but getting grumpier over time. Of course, some
people were nice, and most acknowledged that Manic Sages did not intend to create
a Hunt that went into Monday morning, but, well, you get one guess about which
tweets I spent the most time reading.

Suffice it to say my first puzzle writing experience was not a fun one.

By the time
I did my last answer callback (around 30 minutes before wrap-up), I was apologizing
to the team that was calling, for decisions that I had little responsibility in making,
but which I felt responsible for anyways. The person I called was a bit taken aback,
but assured me that their team simply liked to call in guesses with low odds of success,
and they were sure they'd feel dumb when the solution came out.

Ten years later, teammate wrote another Mystery Hunt that went into Monday morning, with
a similarly large number of free answers as MH 2013. It's hard to reconstruct this,
but according to [an article](https://www.wired.com/2013/01/2013-the-year-the-mystery-hunt-broke/),
MH 2013 gave out at least two dozen free answers. More exact answers may exist in LiveJournals
from the time, if you can find them in the Wayback Machine.

Some people are mad about this. I don't think there was any single reason that
Mystery Hunt was so hard, but there was definitely a systematic underestimation of difficulty
and length. As said in wrap-up, one of our writing goals was to make a downsized Hunt.
If our difficulty had been in-line with last year, it would have been. It just, well, wasn't.

(Well, at least next year's job of writing a shorter Hunt will be easier!)

I'll be fine. I restarted this puzzle writing hobby three years ago for whatever reason,
and since then I've written enough stinkers and highlights to know what I can do as a
puzzle constructor. The Internet is nicer these days as well. People have stronger norms
around mental health, and understand that the Internet is part of real life, rather than
separate from it.

At the same time, the Internet will be the Internet, and I fully expect some people to be
mean. Not because it'll be productive, but because it'll be fun to be mean.

It's very important that people submit feedback about Hunt, and explain their lived
experience. It's a key part of how we keep Hunt going each year. Just, remember not to
make too many assumptions about teammate's lived experience.

As for my play-by-play construction story, that'll come later. I avoided taking on any
management roles and still ended up averaging 20 hrs/week working on Hunt (including some
100 hour weeks towards the end). So, there'll be a lot to talk about, but it'll take me
some time to compile everything.
