---
layout: post
title:  "Puzzlehunting 201"
date:   2024-01-21 01:41:00 -0700
---

I'd like to think I'm good at puzzlehunts. Evidence for:

* Placed 2nd at the recent Who Killed Ickey? Treasure Hunt.
* Got 1st place at a Microsoft College Puzzle Challenge in 2016. (For that campus, not globally.)
* Was on the winning MIT Mystery Hunt team, twice.

This covers the span of easy hunts where the main bottleneck is moving fast (Ickey), and hard hunts where the bottleneck is having good ideas (MIT Mystery Hunt).
I've been doing puzzlehunts for about 13 years and have picked up a few ideas along the way. Now I'm going to share them.

Most of these ideas are not original. Many of them are tricks borrowed from other people. The target
audience for this post is someone who's done multiple puzzlehunts and is interested in getting faster at them,
so **I will not be trying to introduce what puzzlehunts are, or how puzzlehunt-style puzzles work**. People interested
in that should read these introductions, or (better) solve some hunts like DP Puzzle Hunt or recent iterations of
CMU Puzzlehunt.


Disclaimer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Do you really want to get better at puzzles?

I'm serious. I think they're a ton of fun, but they are very definitely artificial. I will
usually claim that puzzlehunts are a good way to practice data analysis and organization,
research hypothesis testing, and generic problem solving. That's all true, but it's true only up
to a point. At some point it turns into practicing the very narrow skills of things that are
acceptable in puzzlehunt style puzzles, rather than learning something more general. It's like
how high school math contests are correlated with doing math research, but aren't *actually*
math research.

And in particular, some skills that make you faster at puzzles could be bad in real life.
Much like engineer's induction, a lot of puzzlehunt tricks are driven by assuming there's a
simple satisfying explanation - which is true for both puzzles and for conspiracy theorists.

(I should probably cut this section I don't actually have a point past this.)


My Puzzle Solving Theory
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Anecdotally, I know someone who's joked that puzzle solving is the processing of
turning a document into a spreadsheet. But that is pretty true! Spreadsheets are a nice way
to format structured data, and puzzles are about taking seemingly random data and finding
the structure within it.

To elaborate a bit more: a puzzle is some set of data, where the designer has
To spell this out a bit more: 

A puzzle is commonly described as some pile of data
