---
layout: post
title:  "BABSCon 2025, Or, Brony Musicians Seize The Means of Production"
date:   2025-06-28 22:49:00 -0700
---

The point of pointless stories is to tell them.

First, some background. Bronies are older fans of My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic,
typically teenager age or older, predominantly male. At least that's how it used to be,
the ratios have shifted to be more female over time. It had a moment in the early 2010s,
spawning a bunch of MLP fan conventions, or brony conventions. Many of these cons are now
dead, but some still run, and the dedicated core fan community still attends enough of them
to keep it sustainable. At their peak, attendance would be in the thousands. These days
it's around 200-800.

BABSCon, short for Bay Area Brony Spectacular, was one such event. They first ran in 2014,
and quickly became one of the mainstays (manestays?) of the brony convention circuit.
My first BABSCon was in 2016, and I attended most years ever since. I never did
a great job at actually making long-lasting friends from these conventions, but they were
fun. For me, they evolved from "OMG, everything is new and amazing" to "oh, I recognize
this vendor from last year, and I've been to this panel before, and I've heard this
story before", and so on. As I left BABSCon 2024, I decided I was no longer attending BABSCon.
I'd gotten my fill, I was running out of merch I wanted to buy, and it just didn't
feel worth my time anymore.

Then at closing ceremonies, they announced that BABSCon 2025 would be the *final* BABSCon.
The organizing staff wanted to move on. I may have fallen out of the con scene, but
*of course* I had to go.

\* \* \*
{: .centered }

A brony convention can very broadly be sliced into these pieces:

* Panels, where official MLP voice actors and writers answer questions, or fans present a
pony-adjacent topic.
* Vendor halls and artist alleys, where fans sell art prints and fan merch.
* Gaming rooms (with board gaming, video gaming, and card gaming all represented).
* Parties run out of hotel rooms (often negotiated with the hotel to satisfy noise
restrictions.)
* A music concert in the evenings, typically with EDM or rock music by brony musicians.

For the final BABSCon, I felt I should give back the community that had brought so much
entertainment and joy to me over the years. On a whim, I filled out a panel application titled
"Ponies and Puzzles". In it, I pitched a two-part panel. The first would cover puzzle
design, and rank the puzzles and riddles which appeared in My Little Pony. (There are
a surprisingly large number of these, since the show has homaged both detective fiction
and adventure fiction.) The second would be an introduction to puzzlehunts. I explained why
I wanted to run this panel, pointed to academic talks I'd given before as evidence of
public speaking experience, and linked [Puzzles are Magic](https://www.puzzlesaremagic.com/),
the MLP-themed puzzlehunt I led the design for back in 2020. I am the most puzzle-pilled
brony in the world, this is the talk I was made for.

The panel was accepted! Which left me the task of preparing a 90 minute talk. Oops. Still,
wasn't this what I signed up for? As I worked on sourcing episode clips and deciding what to
keep and what to cut, I got an email from the events coordinator of BABSCon.

> Hello,
>
> If you are receiving this email then you were accepted to be a panelist at BABSCon 2025.
>
> tl;dr I'm hosting open calls to talk about the schedule.

Panelists were expected to attend one of the open calls, to discuss their audiovisual (AV) requirements,
desired time slots, room constraints, and so on. The way it worked was that the events coordinator
would host a Zoom call, panelists would drop in whenever they were free, and would be called on in
order to chat for 2-5 minutes to find what time worked for them. Figuring that panel slots would be
taken in a first-come first-served basis, I went to the first one I could make, the one for Friday
4-6 PM. I wasn't free until around 5:50 PM, and by the time I got into the call I was 8th in line.
Luckily the host was willing to run late until they got to everyone.

It was fun to hear some behind-the-scenes planning. The first thing I heard was "I normally
host this panel under a stairway, because this is the first time I've gotten to run it officially",
so we're off to a great start.

When I was 3rd in line, the host said they had to take a call. Alright, no problem. They then said
that the situation had evolved into an emergency, and they'd need to cut the call early. Unfortunate,
but understandable. The next open call would be tomorrow, on Saturday.

On Saturday morning, I see the following email.

> Hi all,
>
> Thank you everyone that came yesterday, I found it very successful and have a much better grasp on panelist needs.
>
> I regret to inform you that due to the ongoing situation I will need to cancel the schedule forum today. 
>
> I believe everyone involved tried to do what they thought was best and it is more than unfortunate this conflict came to head in the way it did, when it did. 
>
> We are moving forward with what we have, and despite the circumstances, compared to a week ago I am more confident in our ability to pull things off now than I was then. I will wait for an official statement to be decided before speaking on that further.
>
> This in no way affects the evaluation of any panel and I likewise completely understand anyone who needs to cancel. Obviously there may be changes to the schedule in the next few days. I will plan to resume with forum calls on Sunday (tomorrow) and will send an earlier notification than this if the situation changes.

??????

I have **no idea** what this is referencing. All I know is that there is drama and it's escalated *hard*.
In search of more info, I open the BABSCon Discord for the first time in a long while. And there is a fire.


The Situation
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

I have gone back and forth on how much detail to go into here, and have decided to not name anyone
besides Pinkaboo, the central figure of the story. The names are easy to find if you want to
find them.

Pinkaboo was the music concert coordinator for BABSCon. She has been involved in organizing previous
concerts for both BABSCon and other pony conventions for many years, occasionally performing herself,
and she is widely liked by the brony musician community. General tasks for the music coordinator include
finding musicians, convincing them to attend with perks like free rooms, planning the concert schedule,
coordinating AV, and so on. Each con call their concert something different, usually a horse pun. The one for BABSCon is called
Neighhem.

On Friday 6:18 PM, the musicians are informed that Pinkaboo was fired by BABSCon. (Note the timing - they were told right when
I was waiting in the panel open forum.)

> Hello everyone,
> We wanted to inform you directly that the BABSCon Chairs have made the decision to reorganize
> responsibilities over the Neighhem concert. Moving forward, [name] will assume acting responsibility
> as Concert Lead, while we finish interviewing an individual to assume the role full time. Pinkaboo
> is no longer a member of BABSCon staff; her status as a musician remains unchanged.
>
> To be clear, this decision does not impact the existing plans for Neighhem: The set schedule will
> remain as planned. Musician benefits will remains as previously agreed upon, including the gratis
> party suite rooms, which continue to be under Pinkaboo's purview as private guest rooms.
>
> Moving forward, for official convention business, we have created a channel for Concert's exclusive
> use on the BABSCon server, [link]. We can also be reached via email at [email].
>
> As we approach the finish line, we acknowledge Pinkaboo's work building the strong foundation of
> Neighhem at BABSCon. This is a contribution which we will continue to recognize and acknowledge.
>
> Thank you,
> BABSCon Chairs

The brony musicians immediately get into an emergency Discord call with Pinkaboo to get her side
of the story. They quickly decide the BABSCon Chairs are assholes, do not deserve their respect,
and make a coordinated social media blast announcing that every musician in the lineup is dropping out
of the concert in protest.

It is 3 weeks before the convention and one of the major evening activities no longer exists.

This continues blowing up from Friday into Saturday, with con staff continuing to not put out an
official statement. It's not very clear why Pinkaboo was fired. A rumor goes around that it
was because Pinkaboo made a passive-aggressive tweet when BABSCon staff tweeted out the
wrong draft of a marketing video for the concert, but this was never directly confirmed. (I was
unable to find said tweet. If it ever existed, it was deleted before any archivers got to it.)

On Saturday night, the BABSCon chairs put out their first statement.

> I do want to apologize for the sudden news that broke yesterday, the ripples it sent throughout the community, and how it affected everyone who has planned on attending BABSCon. Our approach to this situation has been to remain respectful of all parties and refrain from divulging sensitive information; however, this approach has led to misunderstandings and understandable concerns from our staff, guests, and attendees. We would like to shed some clarity on a couple specific situations we have seen being discussed publicly, which are excellent examples of multiple perspectives:
>
> In regards to the concerns with Marketing, we agree Pinkaboo was very engaged with the musicians' unique marketing needs, and extensively pushed to have them promoted. It is important to recognize that Pinkaboo worked with us to pre-write and pre-approve all the musician announcement posts. Unfortunately when those marketing pushes did not go well, Marketing was blamed and bared the backlash. Then when Marketing didn't respond fast enough, they were blamed again. This occurred multiple times.
>
> In regards to Musician compensation, we hear reports of all the work Pinkaboo has done to take care of the musician community. One example was letting them stay in her suite so they do not need to pay for their own hotels. That suite, the connecting rooms, and several other rooms, are all paid by BABSCon as part of Concert's budget. Those details of the budget Pinkaboo received, and how she chose to allocate it to the musicians she invited, seem to have been obfuscated from the musicians themselves.
> Do we wish we could pay more for the musicians? Absolutely! The costs to host the concert were already higher than all of the rest of our Panels, Events, Arcade, Tabletop, CCG, Cosplay, and Theatrics budgets all combined, and we worked to stretch it across 50+ musicians as much as we could. We are sorry the details of that were never clearly communicated to the musicians directly.
>
> Internally to staff, there were multiple other situations where statements and allegations Pinkaboo made were, upon review, found to be false.
>
> This leads to the core of the matter – the Chairs have repeatedly seen Pinkaboo twist the truth and serve as an unreliable narrator within our staff team. This issue only grew worse with time, and with three weeks until the convention, it had become an issue we could no longer work around. Part of operating as a team is being able to trust your teammates to accurately and truthfully present information. Pinkaboo lost that trust, and she was removed from staff.

I'd like to point out how little this actually explains the situation if you had no context,
and how little it explains the firing if you did have context. It's just an all-around weird statement.
Saying Pinkaboo was an unreliable narrator without providing examples is like the OpenAI board saying
Sam Altman was not consistently candid without providing examples. Yeah, it didn't work out for them either.

Here is my most charitable interpretation. Pinkaboo did not get along with BABSCon leadership. I suspect
she asked for increasingly large shares of BABSCon money, in the bid to incentivize brony musicians
to make the final BABSCon concert the best one ever. In this, she was **massively** successful,
because the concert lineup is incredibly stacked. There are musicians who have made famous brony songs
but never performed them live. There are musicians who haven't performed live in over 5 years. But
making this happen was expensive. It seems like Pinkaboo and BABSCon didn't work well together, with more of a
begrudging relationship rather than one with constructive criticism. One day the BABSCon chairs
had enough and decided it would be easier to fire Pinkaboo rather than deal with her.

Now, as con chairs, they have the authority to fire anybody. No one says they *can't* fire their
music head. Everyone's saying they *shouldn't*. What gets people the most angry is that this is the final
BABSCon. If the chairs don't want to work with Pinkaboo anymore, they could have just waited 3 weeks.
And, firing someone from the concert they've been planning for months, *and then saying they can still
perform in it as a musician if they want*, is just a crazy level of tone-deafness over what the
concert meant to the people running it. Their lack of emotional musicality is not lost on the general
BABSCon public. The situation pattern matches very strongly to a corporation firing a worker that's
given everything to the company, and *boy* is modern MLP fandom very leftist.

IMAGE

In a game of he said she said, what matters is reputation, and Pinkaboo has a bunch from both the brony
musicians and other pony cons she's worked with before. The burden of proof to justify Pinkaboo's firing is *very* high, and the con staff has failed to
meet it.


Fallout
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Normally, music artists sign contracts with the con to get agreements on what the con will give
the musicians, and vice versa. (For example, Odyssey has said that playing [Discord](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDMGv3hNMes) is
literally in their contract.) With the strike, the penalties in those contracts should trigger,
but the musicians argue the contracts were made with Pinkaboo, rather than BABSCon, so the contracts
don't apply to them anymore.

BABSCon staff disagrees, saying that any common sense interpretation is that the contracts
are from Pinkaboo on behalf of BABSCon rather than Pinkaboo individually. I do actually take BABSCon's
side here, but they never pursue this because it doesn't fix the fundamental problem of having no music
acts.

Other conventions start tweeting in support of the brony musicians. Some individuals start airing out
dirty laundry and grievances from previous BABSCon iterations, alleging BABSCon has a history of treating
talent poorly. My opinion is basically not moved by this at all.
I assume all conventions have internal drama by default, because logistics is hell and hell is a
pressure cooker. You must make fast decisions with imperfect info to make your con run.
Any longrunning convention will, eventually, ban an innocent person for sexual harassment. That's just
where the bar has to be to create the appropriate environment. So, I'm not surprised that people
have bad things to say about BABSCon, now that it's
publicly acceptable to dunk on them.

Con staff and the former BABSCon musicians go into negotiation, to see if there's any way forward.
The musicians' conditions are:

* Pinkaboo must be reinstated as concert head.
* BABSCon head of staff must step down.
* No compromises on either of those points.

BABSCon staff refuses. Now, in my opinion, firing your music lead 3 weeks before con is dumb.
Firing your head of staff 3 weeks before con is just suicidal. As angry as the musicians are about
the concert, they consistently ask people to still attend the convention. Many of them are friends
with brony artists that rely on cons for personal income. Everyone (or rather everypony) still
wants the rest of the convention to be great.

Unfortunately for me, the concert really was the highlight of the con for me. I was mildly into brony
music pre-2020, and then fell deep, deep into the rabbit hole as a side effect of writing the
puzzle [Recommendations](https://www.puzzlesaremagic.com/puzzle/recommendations.html) for
Puzzles are Magic. I have to try to explain *why*, since brony music is really, really not accessible.
It has evolved from
"haha mild remix of song from MLP episodes" to ["metal song based on character from
an MLP AU that last updated 10 years ago"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44ugTb3nZec). This was
one of the *bigger* songs of the year.

I think the best explanation I have for how this all "works" is that if you're a fan of My Little Pony,
you automatically give some slack to music made by other fans of My Little Pony, because clearly
they have good taste. Then the music recommendation algorithms hijack the existing fandom
social fabric to introduce you to new artists. Pretty soon you're radicalized into getting emotional
over a song about [a neurodivergent unicorn that whispers to fish](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H-u9O2eG8qQ).
That's life.

Concerts at MLP conventions fit into this because that's where the target audience for the music is.
Imagine you have a favorite indie rock band, that goes on tour at different venues. Now imagine that
instead of indie rock, it's MLP EDM. One view of conventions is that they let people experience things
they normally wouldn't, and the concert is one of those things. Even if it's actually held in a hotel meeting room.

The hype of BABSCon 2025 being the last BABSCon made the concert lineup *stacked*. People like
Odyssey and 4everfreebrony go to a bunch of events, but BABSCon also had people who hadn't
performed live in ages, like ponyphonic and Vylet Pony. I was especially hype for Vylet Pony,
because she quickly turned into my favorite brony musician after I found her music, and Vylet
*never* goes to conventions. I got into Vylet's work through 4everfree's cover of
[Little Dreams](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rA8ZjlPHlaU),
but by far her most famous song
is ANTONYMPH. Its music video (a love letter to the Internet of the late 2000s/early 2010s)
became very popular, and still has a subfandom of its own.

EMBED HERE

I am partial to the [lyra.horse](https://lyra.horse/antonymph/) version, which pulls some crazy
browser shenanigans and is made by a trans horse infosec researcher. Nothing about that sentence
is surprising if you've spent enough time online.

Vylet was one of the musicians most outspoken about how she only agreed to perform at BABSCon
because she trusted Pinkaboo to keep everything together. So, knowing the main artist I wanted to
see wouldn't be there sucked quite a bit.

EMBED

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nWU-CZozypw

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2OHUhzXyVlY

But, maybe there'd be a way to make it happen anyways.


Asgard Is Not A Place
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All the brony musicians who were going to perform are still going to flying into Bay Area for
BABSCon. They've already paid for flights, after all. So why not hold their own concert?
With blackjack, and hookers. (Actually, with neither of those, because the music concert has always
been family friendly. But you get the sentiment.)

Now, on its face, it is insane to plan and move a concert within 3 weeks. However, this is exactly
what BABSCon now has to do, and the striking musicians have the talent and the fire. Real traction
begins when 15 comes out of hibernation to offer up to $5000 towards running a new concert.

https://x.com/fifteenai/status/1905882472845627529

15.ai was a site run by an AI researcher who went by
the name 15, focusing on voice generation before it was cool. They hosted a site where you could
generate voice clips of My Little Pony characters, for free.
In my opinion, when the site launched in 2020, their model was the highest quality audio generation model
in the world. Like, the voices were better quality than the Google models.
See [the 15.ai Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/15.ai) for more info information.
This made them a celebrity in the fandom - "horse famous", as it were.

15 is known for being reclusive, preferring anonymity and often going radio silent for months at a time
on social media. The BABSCon situation was the first time they had tweeted in 4 months. This was a big deal.

Over the weekend, the idea gained momentum, and soon there were discussions of doing an alternative
concert for real. It was christened as Pinkaboo's Neighhem, and brony musicians began advertising it in
the BABSCon Discord.

This sparks a turf war in the Discord, between defenders and attackers of Pinkaboo's firing. It is heavily, heavily biased
in favor of Pinkaboo and the brony musicians. And, to be clear, I think that was correct, the facts were
on their side.
Even many people on BABSCon staff disagree with how Pinkaboo and the concert were handled. They are
respecting the authority of the con chairs, but many express disappointment (rather than direct replying to
people like the BABSCon chairs are occasionally doing). Eventually, all discussion of Pinkaboo's Neighhem is
contained within a #neighhem-planning channel. (The con chairs do at least understand that stopping discussion
of Pinkaboo is impossible.)

By the end of the weekend, on April 1, details for Pinkaboo's Neighhem are out.

* It will be held on Sunday evening, at the Fox Theatre in downtown Redwood City. This deliberately starts
after BABSCon's scheduled closing ceremony, to avoid competing with the con.
* The event will be free, but donations are welcome to help cover costs. A limited amount of concert
merch will also be on sale, along with a minimal artist alley.
* The music schedule, originally planned for 2 nights, will be compressed into 1 night. Most musicians from the original
lineup will still perform. (A few have to cancel due to being busy on Sunday.)
* There will be free shuttle buses taking people from the BABSCon hotel to the Fox Theatre and back.
* Most importantly,

GO TO THE BUCKING CONCERT!


BABSCon 2025
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

BABSCon chairs have successfully pulled together a new official concert, headlined by Mystery Skulls.
This is pretty impressive, since Mystery Skulls is a "real" (i.e. professional) music artist. The
connection to brony fandom is that they own a lot of their popularity to the Mystery Skulls Animated
series by MysteryBen27, an animator from the early 2010s brony scene. Mystery Skulls Animated is good,
it's the kind of series that raises more questions than it answers, with animation where you can notice new
things on your 4th viewing. [Go watch it!](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YlEb3L1PIco)

Mystery Skulls was scheduled to perform at BABSCon 2020, before it was shut down due to COVID.
So they already had a working relationship with BABSCon, and as someone connected to but outside of the fandom,
they're not breaking the strike in the same way that a brony musician would. I mean, they are breaking the
strike, but it's already been decided to be irreconcilable, so, whatever.

https://x.com/mysteryskulls/status/1230154228523339777

With this, a few people point out that against all odds, the situation has led to a better attendee
experience. If you wanted a concert, now you have two concerts. The official BABSCon concert (now called
Burning Mare) is now significantly shorter, and the slack in the schedule is used to move many panels to
larger rooms. My panel benefits from this - I get upgraded from a side room further away from the main hub
to one of the three main panel rooms. There are still hard feelings, but the average con experience
really did get better for people uninvolved. The breakup is bad but the divorce is clean.

When I get to the con, I immediately line up for the con store, because I'm pretty confident they will run out
of some items by tomorrow. I come out with a BABSCon 2025 T-shirt and a coin from leftover BABSCon 2024 merch.
The T-shirts run out by Friday, my call was correct. I pick up a printed out conbook, and perhaps it's
just my imagination, but the page advertising Mystery Skulls feels like noticably different paperstock.

There isn't too much to comment on for the rest of the con. As I said, I've been to enough of these to know what
to expect, and when I walk into the vendor hall, I don't even want to buy that many things, because I recognize
the faces of at least 2/3rds of the vendors from previous pony conventions. I end up buying some prints from
one of the MLP comics artists that's attending BABS for the first and final time, and some tiny wood burned
pony arts that were 25 cents each at a gacha setup. The one thing I'm surprised to not see are resellers
of the Kayou MLP cards that are popular in China. I figured at least one vendor would be trying to doing to
some arbitrage with them.

When it gets close to the time for my panel, I head to the room. I'm not sure if I set it up myself or if someone
from the con will help organize. When no one else comes for a bit, I set it up myself. From my standpoint, the panel
goes well. I have to live-debug fixing computer audio in the middle,
but people are engaged the whole time and have good follow-up questions about puzzle design at the end. We get through
the [Power](https://deusovi.github.io/puzzlefiles/zelda-minihunt.pdf) puzzle
from Deusovi's Zelda Minihunt, a runthrough of [Art of the Dress](https://www.puzzlesaremagic.com/puzzle/art-of-the-dress.html) from
Puzzles are Magic, and get partway through a group solve of [Cross Eyed](https://www.puzzlesaremagic.com/puzzle/cross-eyed.html)
in overtime before the next panel takes the stage.

The food is predictably overpriced, and the gaming area is predictably fun. One of my favorite BABSCon memories is
playing 3 hours of Smash 64 against someone continuously salting about how bullshit Kirby is while wearing Trixie cosplay.
Unfortunately, the gaming demographics have shifted heavily to Smash Ultimate and a little bit of Them's Fightin' Herds, neither of
which I got that into. The panels are fun. One that is a livecasting of a modded WWE game, changing all the
wrestlers to look like MLP characters. Another goes through a leaked internal Hasbro document circa 2013, that analyzed
brony fandom and culture for the purposes of helping their marketing teams decide what to do about it.

At the British themed room party, I meet one of the organizers of
[PonyCon Holland](https://ponyconholland.com/), who complains that me going to London doesn't count as visiting the UK.
I ask what would count - he says "anywhere but London". We talk a bit about pony cons outside the US, and the
recent explosion of the Chinese bronycon scene. I don't follow Chinese brony fandom much, but have
learned some slang like 虹林檎 and 稀有苹果. My Little Pony is massive over there; it feels like China
is 10 years behind the US, and they are living through the 2015-2016 peak of MLP popularity, with new conventions
appearing every year. In the US, this was followed by a contraction, as the less well run cons died off.
Hopefully that doesn't happen to the Chinese scene, but it'll depend how much staying power MLP has.
Someone there speculates that Hasbro will prepare a marketing push for the Year of the Horse in 2026. We'll see.

The final BABSCon wraps up with its charity auction, which I am quickly priced out of. As closing ceremonies begin,
a few people start boarding the shuttles that have arrived for Pinkaboo's Neighhem.


Pinkaboo's Neighhem
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
