---
layout: post
title:  "MIT Mystery Hunt 2026"
date:   2026-01-21 00:32:00 -0800
---

*This has spoilers for MIT Mystery Hunt 2026. Spoilers are not labeled or hidden.*

Mystery Hunt is a funny time of year. You explain to your friends why you're
traveling to Boston in the winter. You try to convey the scale of the event
you're attending, while knowing your friends don't quite understand. And although
it ostensibly takes place over one weekend, the prep work and wind-down makes it
really last for two weeks.

As part of that wind-down, I've realized I need to write this post quickly, otherwise
I'm not going to get any work done this week.

# Pre-Hunt

The time running up to Hunt was more stressful than usual...very briefly, I typically
hunt with teammate. This year, some people on teammate were interested in splitting
into a new team. This got messy, but I share the opinion that a split was never
going to be clean. I joined the split, and here we are.

The new team, christened Level 1 Spicy, was 33 people,
so I had little expectation of finishing Hunt. However, I did think it was
*possible*, since I knew how strong some of those people were. Teams like Unicode
Equivalence have finished Hunt before, and combined with rumors that Cardinality
was targeting a shorter hunt, I thought we had a shot.

This was somewhat tempered once we got into Hunt proper, and started hitting
hard puzzle walls. It certaintly wasn't the hardest Hunt I've done, but things
got pretty crazy (in a good way). When Cardinality stopped by our HQ Saturday afternoon saying
we had a shot at finishing, I did not believe them, and my hopes continued dropping
when the Coin hadn't been found by Sunday noon. In the end, we got there, thanks
to aggressive endgame hinting (which I'll discuss later).

Why Level 1 Spicy?

Uhhhhhhhhhhhhhh

Okay, so, first there was a team name proposing process, run with approval voting,
followed by a final poll that completely failed to generate consensus. The entries
with most support also had a few very strong haters, which seemed bad for something
trying to unify the team. That poll was declared invalid, and then little progress
happened for 6 weeks.

Seeing this, I self-appointed myself as voting commissioner, for the sake of
picking *something* as a team name. No one should have let me
do this, because it eventually led to a pretty overcooked 3 stage voting process.
First there was an approval voting stage, with unilateral vetos, followed by
an instant runoff vote which selected Level X Spicy by literally 1 vote, followed by one last approval
vote to decide X = 1.

I wrote a two page document analyzing why the properties of this voting system
were reasonable, and no, none of you get to read it. We locked in the team name
the weekend before Hunt.

The other important part of pre-Hunt this year was sushi. You see, there's this
restaurant chain called Kura Revolving Sushi, that does collabs, and, they're running
one with Kirby.

KIRBY IMAGE

The blanket collab started the Wednesday before Hunt, so me and a few people
from original teammate did a Kura sushi run, counting exactly how many plates we
needed to eat to get to 3 blankets worth of spend. While there, it was clear that
literally every party was there for the Kirby blanket, so the promotion definitely worked.
I saw the group across from us had brought a Rainbow Dash plushie. I considered
complimenting them on it, but unfortunately I am not socially brave enough to
walk up to a stranger at a revolving sushi bar restaurant. Alas, so it goes.
After stuffing myself like Kirby, I was rewarded appropriately.

BLANKET IMAGE

After dinner, I was asked if we were doing [Mystery Hunt Bingo](https://www.alexirpan.com/mystery-hunt-bingo/)
this year. I didn't see any reason not to, so I pushed some edits to the phrase list
to swap D&M entries for Cardinality entries. Along the way, I noticed someone
had filed a [pull request](https://github.com/alexirpan/mystery-hunt-bingo/pull/1)
to add "Puzzle about 6 7" to the phrase list. I, a man of the people, obviously
accepted the PR.

Having decided on a team name of Level 1 Spicy, a bunch of us went to [Level99](https://www.level99.com/)
the Thursday before Hunt.
We also met up with [Level 51](https://levelfiftyone.wordpress.com/) after coming back,
so really we spanned the entire range of levels there. I'm glad we finished
some of the new rooms at Level99, even if I am now 0 for 15 at getting a clear of
Magician's Assistant. I also did one of the Boxaroo live events with some other
people on the team, definitely fun even if we rushed through it pretty fast.
For dinner, we went to Yume Wo Katare, where the cook was offering a Carolina
Reaper challenge to the front row. Finish one Carolina Reaper over the course of dinner,
and your next 5 bowls of Ramen would be free. We did not take this challenge,
but one guest did. Little did we know this would not be our last encounter with
hot peppers this weekend.


# Friday

I started my Friday by getting breakfast at Verveine, but this was breakfast at 8am,
so it was long before any crowds come in. On the walk over, Ivan asked me if I
had a spare server to host a meme. I did not, but he eventually found one
to deploy [levelxspicy.cooking](levelxspicy.cooking). This site was connected to
a Discord bot in our server, where anyone could `/cook` or `/uncook`
to update how much the team was cooking or getting cooked.

We got to 10-250 early to make sure we got seats, but someone from Cardinality said a
seminar (?) was going on, and we wouldn't be allowed in until close to Hunt start.
Only as I write this do I realized that maybe this was an in-universe seminar
for the CRYPTIC conference. I did do the pre-Hunt, but it was so long ago that
I'd completely forgotten the theme.

I had high hopes for Cardinality's Mystery Hunt, because I know I'm in the same
generation of Internet culture, and I was not disappointed by the PuzzMon. It
was interesting to hunt on a team that fit in a single classroom, rather than
shuffling people between two rooms like we did before. It certainly made
coordination easier.

Several of us were curious what Cardinality meant by team coordination over limited
resources being important (the leading team meme was that we'd be playing Farmville).
This year, Hunt used a Research Points (RP) system. Small scavenger hunt style
tasks would give RP, which could be spent to unlock puzzles or rounds. In the early round (the Kingdom), RP was the only way to unlock puzzles, with a hard cap on the number
of open puzzles at once. Later, we would unlock Dimensions rounds, which had
more typical Hunt unlocks where new puzzles were driven by round progression.

The RP system was pretty complex, but I think all the pieces worked. I liked the
way it distributed scavenger hunt tasks over the entire weekend, rather than one
big concentrated chore.
The way it was phrased made it feel like we needed to be really aggressive
on earning RP, and we didn't realize how generous the RP was until midway through Friday,
when we saw we had way more RP than we'd need given the pace of Hunt unlocks. Still,
it's better for teams to be too rich rather than too poor.

I could see the RP system being especially good at giving newer solvers a thing
to do if they were intimidated by the puzzles, but for our team in particular,
it was very hard to justify sending a marginal person off on a long Research Task,
so we gradually shifted to only doing the tasks that seemed super fast and ignored
the rest. I think this is the same as a typical Scavenger hunt, where you aren't
going to do every entry in the list, but it felt different when the tasks
were dripfed one at a time, rather than given all at once.

Speaking of Research Tasks, there was also MonQuest, an interactive overworld
where you could find PuzzMon and solve small puzzles for RP. I tried doing this
for a bit, before realizing I was only discovering things that someone had already
discovered. I ended up doing zero MonQuest after the opening round, but I did
work on...

[**Feather Forecast:**](https://puzzmon.world/research_tasks/feather_forecast)
A puzzle that worked the way we thought it would, although I submitted RETURN
first despite that being impossible. In my defense, I had Pokemon on my mind,
and Return is a good attacking move.

[**Mountain Cave:**](https://puzzmon.world/research_tasks/mountain_cave)
I found where this was, transcribed the data, and then must have inputted it
wrong. It got solved by others later.

That would be the last time I opened MonQuest for the rest of Hunt.

[**Jumping to Conclusions:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/jumping_to_conclusions)
Man, I solved so few puzzles in Kingdom this Hunt. After Land of No Name unlocked,
I got sucked into Dimensions nonsense and barely left...Anyways, this puzzle was
a bunch of fun. I'm a big fan of trying to cheese puzzles and I think the
"intended" solve path of each is signposted well enough if you've done enough
prior puzzles. I wrote a script to bash Skyscrapers, then worked on a script to bash
the final extraction. Scanning the output, I saw OMI???D in the output, and
suggested a thematic answer that could be correct. I explained that I wasn't
sure we should submit it, given this letter pattern was one of hundreds of
possibilities, and then someone else submitted it and solved the puzzle.

[**Somebody:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/somebody)
Our solve of this was pretty smooth once we found the right site to look up
historical playlists. Got most of the songs, figured out the a-ha via searching
a bunch at once, then finally realized why somebody told us these things.

[**Bringing Up Baby Shark (Capstone):**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/bringing_up_baby_shark)
To be honest, I did not notice the descriptions were labeled "Herring description"
rather than "Red herring description". The text was just clearly puzzly enough
for it to override my "is this a red herring" detectors.

The way capstones in this round worked was that every puzzle solve unlocked
information about PuzzMon in your PokeDex (sorry, MonArch), and each capstone could
be solved independent of puzzle answers. All answers in Kingdom then went into
one big meta matching pool at the end. I thought this was pretty clever.
This structure let Cardinality order all Kingdom puzzles arbitrarily, without
needing to worry about grouping unlocks of a single meta together. Typically,
the downside of meta matching structure is that you don't get to solve a meta
until after you solve enough feeders to match things together, but the
capstones act as a milestone of progress before you hit that point.

I do think this had downsides later though, where we put less priority on capstones
as we unlocked more Dimensions and Artifacts. We understood that capstones
needed to be solved, but didn't *understand* the level of importance they had
on unlock structure.

Solving Baby Shark unlocked Land of No Name, and that was the last time I did
anything meaningful in Kingdom. The Land of No Name was a gimmicked round of
26 puzzles. Each puzzle started with all letters redacted, and solving a puzzle
would un-redact a specific letter across the entire round. After you solved 2-3
of them, you could be confident about what letter each puzzle would unlock,
which turned the solve process into one big prioritization game of deciding when
you had enough info to solve a puzzle, and which puzzles would give the most
useful letters.

If it wasn't clear, this round was super cool, and by the time we finished it
there were other Dimensions round nonsense going on, so I ended up losing track
of Kingdom rounds and never really caught back up.

[**🍓🏔️🎮:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/2871)
I have around 200 hours across Celeste and the Strawberry Jam mod. Of course
I was doing the Celeste puzzle.
No idea how accessible it was for people who didn't play Celeste, but I appreciated
the deep cuts on Celeste lore. I was especially proud of casually breaking in on
the 👩🏻‍🦰💀section, although I was more impressed with teammates that broke
in on the meaning of #1👣[3] and why #9§⊃(🚦■'🌈=💙🌈) needed to be clarified.

Our final Land of No Name solve order was ZMJQAOFNIXUHYSCKWDVRBTELPGmeta, and
funnily enough the Z solve was actually useful to our M solve, by giving us
?-Z↑ which let us guess it'd turn into A-Z↑. It's not every day where getting 1
of 2 letters in a puzzle speeds up a solve.

[**🍳 Emoji Kitchen:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/1906)
After finishing Celeste, our group rotated to other puzzles in the round, to
see what was tractable. Emoji Kitchen had 3/5 nonograms done, so we started
looking at extraction while the last 2 nonograms got finished. We didn't really
know what to do with the base emojis, but eventually went with the time-honored
strategy of "just color everything relevant and trust it'll work out". And it
did! Always nice when that happens. I'm certainly glad we didn't need to decompose the entire grid.

[**Nine Lives (Capstone):**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/nine_lives)
I am still upset I didn't get the Aladdin character, but not as upset as the people
who figured out who the rest of the "blue people" were.

[**Game, ???, Match:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/8402)
The people working on this had IDed most games, and just needed help finding sets.
I helped find a few, enough to parse out the cluephrase. Seeing the conditions of "trains, uses dice, 8 letters", I suggested Monopoly. This was shot down for not being sufficiently about trains, but the
Monopoly believers pointed out a valid answer for the rest of the cluephrase. It
wasn't like we had another game in mind
anyways, so we submitted it and it was right.

[**Almost:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/6714)
I broke in on THE QUICK BROWN ... off the enum + the 3 letters we had, and then it
was mostly a struggle to the finish.
I liked that the pangrams were based on
real ones, but slightly altered to still require some reasoning about letters.
Still have no idea what possessed someone to write a Genshin clue.

Continuing the theme of the previous puzzle, I solved the second
clue to B, this got shot down for giving a bad cluephrase start, UBE\*. I didn't
disagree, but was really confident B was the only good extract. We
resolved it by splitting into "find a way to continue UBE\*" vs "find a better
answer to the 2nd clue". I won >:)

[**Stray Child:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/stray_child)
This was a starting puzzle in the Hyperbolic Space round, and it completely wrecked us.
Over Hunt, we noticed the general unlock format was to start each Dimensions
round with difficult puzzles, and ease up difficulty towards the end. I think
there are merits to this. Dimensions rounds come with a puzzle width increase,
and starting with harder puzzles can help temper this. Putting the hard puzzles
at the end means they mostly get skipped. If you want the Hunt winner to be decided
by how teams perform on the hardest content, then it's fine to frontload hard
feeders with medium difficulty metapuzzles, and force teams to engage with the
hard feeders, rather than using very hard metas like 2025 did.

I'd say both difficulty orderings are reasonable, but the effect on our team was
to get stuck on all starting Hyperbolic puzzles and become deathly afraid of
our Hunt progress through the rest of the Dimensions rounds. Between Land of
No Name and Hyperbolic Space, we started running the Kingdom with only 5-6 PuzzMon
unlocked, because we just did not have the manpower to run Kingdom at 8 PuzzMon,
and wanted to leave some easier Kingdom puzzles available through Sunday.

Stray Child! I clocked the puzzle as being about ~~weeb~~ Japanese culture pretty
quickly, and worked on the initial grid fill with others. The part we got stuck
at was resolving the weird, puzzly parts of the grid fill. I think we were circling
the correct idea for a long time, but gave up before ever fixing the grid fill
and eventually backsolved it.

[**Pursuit of Liberty:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/pursuit_of_liberty)
I proposed a puzzle that would have worked exactly like
this one in 2023. Same extraction and everything. I didn't go forward with it
because I don't actually play Go, I just know the rules. During Hunt I looked at
it briefly, failed to solve a Go problem, and ignored it until it got backsolved,
so it's really for the best I didn't write this.

[**Nominative Determinism:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/nominative_determinism)
I didn't solve this during Hunt, I just think everyone should try the quiz. We
postsolved it with a council of four and it was magical to get a perfect score
on our first try.

[**Odd One Out:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/2843)
I can only describe this puzzle as a complete shitpost in the best way, and
am proud to announce I found 1/3 of the extract letters.

[**Imaginary Factorizations:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/8063)
We did the first step of the puzzle, got completely hardstuck on noticing the
$$\lfloor b/100 \rfloor$$ step, and eventually backsolved the puzzle.

Before Hunt, there was some speculation about how much people would try using
AI to solve the puzzles. We did not use LLMs outside of trying them if dumping
things into Google failed to find anything, but, they *do* sometimes work if you
know what you're doing. On Manifold, people tried a few text-only puzzles after
the fact, and GPT 5.2 Pro managed to zero-shot both this puzzle
(https://chatgpt.com/share/696aebb1-2a48-8000-a2e0-3575d9998bc8)
and Six Shifts given 5 letters (https://chatgpt.com/share/696afc2f-d1f4-8000-b520-3e2195ea032c).
Sure, it took 41 minutes and 16 minutes respectively, and probably cost ~$30
in API credits for just those questions, but it *worked* and could have given us
a solve if we were more LLM inclined.

[**Puzzmon: The Card Game:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/puzzmon_the_card_game)
Our team has a few card game sickos and I am one of them. Viewing it just as a game,
all of us agreed it seemed super snowbally. We did not try playing the game for real,
but our read of the rules is that the winner is really advantaged the next round
since you get to keep your Puzzmons and Stat-Ups, while your opponent has to lose one.
Maybe in practice, the effects of the Commanders are swingy enough to overcome
the snowball.

As a puzzle, I primarily did quote look-up, then rule look-up. We got around 75% of the way through
without knowing how to extract, which made it hard to decide what to record
each round. After about an hour, I finally noticed first letters, and this
caused us to ragequit the puzzle until Saturday morning. In retrospect, I should
have pushed harder for just doing the extraction, but I too was getting baited
by puzzles like...

[**Triple Threat:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/8904)
I had identified some of the horse Triple Crowns from 3-4 letters earlier (I know that dataset
way too well). By time we'd come back from the card game, there were enough letters
to get all the baseball Triple Crowns. As intended, I noticed the hyphen could
be a minus sign, added a column for the extract, and read out "INKIGAYO". This
near-instantly triggered a lecture from the K-pop fans on our team on what it
was and what to do. I was so thankful the Wikipedia entries for this show were
so organized, and we finished the puzzle pretty quickly with one last request
for Korean readers to look at our grid.

Said K-pop fans pointed out that this was the 3rd Mystery Hunt puzzle which
extracted by drawing Hangul
to clue a word related to rain, after [Fountain](https://puzzles.mit.edu/2023/puzzlefactory.place/puzzles/fountain)
from MITMH 2023 and [Fountain Show](https://puzzles.mit.edu/2020/puzzle/fountain_show/)
from MITMH 2020. Keep an eye out for 2029, K-pop fans.

[**Mass Confusion:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/5823)
Opened the puzzle, identified MEYER, added a column for MAYOR before we'd broken
in on the a-ha, left the puzzle immediately after, but all my contributions
were still in the sheet at time of solve. I'm helping!

Around this time, we came up to the Saturday 1 AM boundary, and started heading
to hotels. This year, most of Level 1 Spicy was at the Marriott rather than Le
Meridien, but a few people were around to gather in my hotel room, as I planned
to stay up for at least another hour. Or two, or three...

[**Skilldrasil:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/6592)
I had solo-started this puzzle before leaving our classroom, identifying
6/8 skills and expressed that the puzzle was basically solved. I then got
completely stuck, roped someone else into checking my data, and got them completely stuck too.
I'm not sure why I didn't search all the colored skills together, put them all into a cleaner list, or search the puzzle title once we'd parsed it. Somehow I thought they had been fully used, and were
picked to be easy to identify from partial info, rather than carrying more extraction information within them.
Eventually fresh eyes solved it on Saturday afternoon.

[**Word Compression:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/word_compression)
The overnight guidance from our Hunt ops team was to either work on Hyperbolic
Space puzzles, or spend unlocks in Eland Islands, the newly opened Kingdom region.
People tried to get me to solve [Multidimensional Crossword](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/multidimensional_crossword), but I was like, "that's bait at 1 AM, I need a win after failing to
do Skilldrasil, I'm doing Kingdom puzzles".
I opened Word Compression instead, and pair-solved it in 12 minutes. IDK, it just
worked.

[**The Quaking Earth:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/the_quaking_earth)
We next opened The Quaking Earth, which looked like a standard Mangled Clues
puzzle. Some people from the Marriott joined our VC, saying they were here to
turn our 1 hour solve into a 15 minute solve. Our combined group then took just
over an hour to finish, so certainly an optimistic take. After solve, it was
late enough for me to kick people out of my room, and try to get some sleep.

[**Keep Going:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/keep_going)

> okay the ansewr [sic] is stop and I just guessed it - jerry
>
> wut
>
> insane
>
> AHAHAHAHAA
>
> god tier
>
> I just wanted to stop and I guess it worked...
>
> loading puzzle all over again

# Saturday

This year, I resolved to get a reasonable amount of sleep, which meant 5-6
hours and waking up to groggily look at [**Hidden Numbers**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/hidden_numbers), which really did not need my help. Having solved this, I filled out my
lunch order from the hotel room before I forgot, then walked to our room.

[**Devilish Devilries:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/devilish_devilries)
This was the perfect puzzle to solve just after waking up, because it involved
shouting sus phrases across the room and getting people to wonder just what kind
of puzzle we were working on. The innocent person who asked what some of the phrases
meant will be kept anonymous for their protection.

[**MIT Dropquotes:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/3175)
We were close to the end of the Alphabet round now, and focusing on unlocking
the meta. By this point of the round, we'd solved enough puzzles to make the
unknown letters pretty constrained, and solvable in the standard nutrimatic way.
Well, as long as there wasn't user error...

> why did I just type my nutrimatic query into WolframAlpha

IMAGE

[**The Alphabet (meta), part 1:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/7182)
Dropquotes gave us enough letters to look at the meta, which immediately looked
programming-y. The usual suspects took a look. Parsing the flavor text as
"Rewrite L-system to depth five", our theory was that we would need to take the
string LSYSTEM, rewrite it with our letter -> word mapping, and the given
numbers were a checksum on where letters A to Z existed in the expanded version
of LSYSTEM, to give a way to solve the puzzle from partial info. Given how
many letters we were missing, we all concluded we needed to solve more feeders
to make the meta tractable, and decamped for that.

[**Da' Bomb:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/da_bomb)
🌶️ PEPPER ALERT 🌶️ PEPPER ALERT 🌶️ PEPPER ALERT 🌶️
It was mandatory for our team to work on this puzzle. I did ID of the guests
being interviewed and words bleeped out. Our first instinct was the ID the
hot sauce used in the part of the episode the clip was from. This wasn't
super defined for some clips that came from the introduction, but we rounded
it to using the first hot sauce.

We had the right broad idea of "identify the ingredients in each hot sauce",
but the first group failed to realize we should actually try and ID the hot
sauces we were given. I tried the chili oil ("yep, that's chili oil"), then
the one labeled 10 ("yep, that spice is still going"). I realized that I was
no help on actually solving the puzzle, and was just tasting hot sauce for
the fun of it, so I worked on something else. I never ended up tasting Da' Bomb
and regret it (we threw out the samples overnight after finishing the puzzle).

There are scientific studies showing that [people would rather electrically
shock themselves than sit in a room doing nothing](https://www.science.org/content/article/people-would-rather-be-electrically-shocked-left-alone-their-thoughts), and I
thought this puzzle was made for those people.

[**Atlas of Mosaics:**](https://puzzmon.world/rounds/atlas_of_mosaics)
This round was so hype and also so insane from a tech perspective. I don't want
to think about how long it took to set this up. This unlocked while we were
stuck on Alphabet meta, and as much as I tried to keep thinking about alphabets,
I decided it'd be better to take a break on a collaborative crossword instead.

Within Crossing the Unknown, I worked on the first Orientation grid, then Valuation,
Interpretation, and Integration. Still can't believe that clue solved to HIGH
CARDINALITY. And then within Interpretation, I was pretty happy with figuring out
the 🤖🚕 and 🪶🖊️ parts of the grid.

Once solved, I did the starting jigsaws for Case of the Superhero Dinner Party,
and the initial placement of Pokemon tiles in Inconsequential Chase, before
moving back to Alphabet. I regret spoiling myself on Dinner Party, it looks
fun to forward solve.

[**The Alphabet (meta), part 2:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/7182)
We now had 24/26 letters, thanks to a solve of the E puzzle. (I brought
a copy of Bananagrams to Hunt in case we ended up playing board games. We didn't
but I'm glad it came in clutch.) By this point, we'd noticed the first and last
letter constraints, and Brian wrote some Sheets formula magic to derive backsolve
constraints for our missing feeders, assuming the LSYSTEM expansion idea. Meanwhile,
a few of us were implementing the expansion in code to support turtle movements
later.

Brian successfully got a backsolve out of his sheets, and at this point I should
clarify that our idea for how the given numbers worked was *completely fake*.
The numbers were not indices in one long string, they were lengths of single letters
when expanded out. So somehow, we just got super lucky on whatever constraints
the sheet was giving. By now we had 25/26 letters, so the last one fell to a
bruteforced dictionary search.

Each number now mapped to a single letter. If we treated the first number as A,
and the last number as Z, this gave a substitution cipher that we could apply.
Or alternatively, we could treat it as a cycle. The given letter order started
WFETUR, and if you follow the chain of edges formed by A->W, B->F, C->E, ...,
it gives a full cycle. This is a 1/26 probability for a random permutation,
which made it seem important.

Neither of this is how the puzzle works. We continued to flail, and ended up
dispersing for other work.


[**Fate's Thread Casino:**](https://puzzmon.world/rounds/fates_thread_casino)
I don't play gacha games. However, I have played my share of games that use
gacha tactics of daily quests, random drops with pity systems, etc. Maybe this
makes me a gacha player in spirit, but I would argue that I am not a gacha player
by choice. Rather, the effectiveness of gacha mechanics has creeped into video
game design as a whole.
Although we can carve out our own regions of sanity, at some time we must all
become gacha players.

Sorry, what was I talking about? Right, puzzles. The structure of the unlocks
was pretty cool - all puzzles had unlocks from one shared pool of chips. Solving
quests would give you chips to spend pulling individual clues for the banner of
your choice. Quests acted like knowledge checks or hints for the meaning of clues,
rewarding you with more chips for pulls. It was possible to pull clues you've
already seen, which added an element of randomness to what to pull.

Although we (correctly) suspected the unlocks were fully rigged,
this did not stop us from coping about which banners to pull to open up quests.
At one point, the people working on one banner had the pulls from their quests
siphoned to another banner, and demanded getting paid back with interest. All
very funny. The puzzles in this round were all really big (30+ clues for each one),
but since the clues were drip-fed one at a time, it made it feel more manageable
than one big puzzle page would be.

My introduction to the round was solving cryptics for [As the Fly Crows](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/as_the_fly_crows). I contributed to the gimmick a-ha, although we
incorrectly assumed the cryptics for the other puzzle were fully ungimmicked.
I don't consider myself the biggest cryptic fan, so I left the bulk of those
puzzles for others.


[**Atlas of Mosaics, part 2:**]
Looking back at the Atlas, I saw that Inconsequential Chase had gotten stuck
on Years. Every tile was placed, but the grid wasn't solving, so some of 45
hexagons were in the wrong spot. People understandably did not want to fact check
this, and were trying to solve around it by going the other way. I briefly
tried to find the problem, failed, and looked at The Tortured Programmers
Department instead.

By this time, all the programming people had abandoned Alphabet, so we were
free to take a look at this puzzle. We quickly clocked it as some variant
of Befunge that worked on hex grids. I found the documentation for Hexagony,
and then played the moral support side of pair programming, saying
"that looks good" or "that looks bad" to those actually working on the
control flow. I appreciated that you could really handwave (vibe-hex?)
your way around the exact program structure, by placing the high-level
mirrors and then shuffling the last few pieces until it solved.

Cardinality came to visit our HQ shortly after we'd solved MEAN and
MIRRORBALL. This was Saturday evening, and they said we were potentially on
track to finish and could give hints on majorly stuck puzzles to help us get
there.

[**The Alphabet (meta), part 3:**]
We gave Cardinality our information so far, and they said all the substitution
cipher and cycle stuff should be ignored. Instead, we should treat it as just
an ordering of the letters, and they suggested we look at both the turtle path
and grid at once. This pushed us enough to finish the meta.

I talked about it with people after the Hunt, and I think the main issue is
a big lack of checks after you get the original letter ordering. On top of the
cycle things we were stuck on, we had ambiguities on:

* Whether to follow the WFETUR... directions one after the other, or reset
after each letter.
* Multiple ideas based on extracting when the turtle wandered in the region
each letter labeled, rather than the intended mechanic.
* In our long string, whether to treat a single letter as a direction, or
convert an entire word like FIREBRAND into one FD command (effectively an
off-by-one on how to convert the depth 5 string into directions.
* Similarly, whether to treat FIREBRAND as one FD, or nine FD (to match length),
or seven FD (to match length of things within the FD.

I don't think all of those ideas were justified, but they were plausible enough
for us to try implementing. The compounding nature of the 50-50 interpretations
made it hard to conclude a given solve path wouldn't work.
We had independently tried visualizing the turtle paths without the grid,
and checked if the translation offsets of single letters matched offsets between
letters in the grid, but we had never tried visualizing the turtle paths on top
of the grid until hinted that way.

[**Atlas of Mosaics, part 3:**]
We finished up the rest of Tortured Programmer's Department without too much
issue, with me doing the song ID + word transform side, getting all the data
just in time to plug into the programming output that had been done in parallel.
This opened up a bunch of logic puzzles for the logic puzzle fans, and I moved
to working on Casino clues instead.

During that, we crossed the Sunday 1 AM boundary. This time there'd be no late
night solving party from my room, which I was secretly thankful for, as I was
aiming to sleep earlier that night, after a bit more Casino grinding.

[**Plots / Graphs:**]
I really like Plots and Graphs in theory. In practice, we made some progress but
didn't get to the finish due to how many images there were, and the minimal
footholds on searching images if you did not catch the reference. This is a kind
of fake criticism though - the point of the puzzle is how abstractly it clues
its ideas, and you can't really design around it.

I was pretty happy at breaking in on the nested stories and alternate timeline
formats. As for US presidents, I have to admit we were AI assisted here. I tried
to search the answer to Quest 14, failed to get anywhere, and tried tossing it
into Gemini 3 out of exasperation.

IMAGE HERE

To my surprise, it solved it and that let us break in on two other quests. I
identified a few more Graphs, then idly poked at our Casino answers so far and
noticed the interleaving property that was meta relevant. I shared it in the
chat in hopes it would enable backsolves, but my understanding is that the
constraints were pretty weak.

While I was bumbling around Atlas and the Casino, the rest of the team had
finished all the Kingdom capstones and unlocked Connect the Clans at 2 AM.
That would be a tomorrow morning problem.


# Sunday

When I woke up, the coin hadn't been found yet. This was concerning for us:
based on our estimation of team strength, it seemed unlikely for us to finish
if the coin hadn't been found by Sunday morning.

I was recruited to take a look at [Meme Scenes](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/meme_scenes), which had the most ID work and was stuck on extraction.
My first instinct for how to solve the puzzle was identical to what was in
our sheet. Without other ideas, we decided to send in a hint request, and were
told we had the right idea, we just needed to clean up our data.

Our guess was that we'd open the Casino meta at 7/10 solves, so we needed to
pick which of meme art, cultured art, or graphs to work on. Both Meme Scenes
and Common Scenes had all the a-has and needed grinding, while Graphs was making
more progress but had an unknown number of a-has ahead. Based on that, and
assurance that Common Scenes was going to solve soon, we abandoned the rest
to focus on other parts of Hunt progression.

That ended up being Atlas for me, and Connect the Clans for others. There was
some Penny Park related trauma to Connect the Clans...in 2020, teammate infamously
got stuck on the Penny Park pennies for 6 hours, and the tokens just looked
too much like the pennies. We broke in on the mechanics, and did everything
correct, except for rotating the tokens such that the arrow pointed to the
next seat rather than pointing due north. So that puzzle also got stuck
until we got rescued by a hint.

Hunt ops speculated that we were no longer going to get any new Dimensions
rounds. I still think this argument was cope. It wasn't invalid reasoning, but
it was a lot more complicated than "we are missing 2 whole rounds because
top teams are much further ahead of us."

IMAGE

In defense of Hunt ops, it was really not clear to us that Connect the Clans
in Kingdom could be acting as a bottleneck on Dimensions round unlocks. There
is a difference between noting that Dimensions often unlocked after capstones
were solved, and fully believing in this enough to roll out the implications
on Hunt strategy while all sorts of other puzzles are flying. This does seem to
be a common theme in comments I've been reading: there was good signposting of
parts of the unlock logic, but unlocks as a whole were a bit opaque, just
due to the complexity of the systems.


[**Terminus (part 1):**](https://puzzmon.world/rounds/terminus)
My experience with this round was incredibly bizarre. I opened the round,
tried guessing a number of things, and immediately understood it would be
top priority to understand the Terminus black box enough to do the latter
half of the round. So, a small crew including me worked solely on exploring the
black box, while the minipuzzles were getting unlocked and solved under us.
Poking the universe box was a full-time job, so I went from round start to
Terminus metameta unlock knowing almost nothing about the puzzles we
was unlocking. We were just telling people to go work on metas we'd opened
and moving to the next unlock.

We broke in on the formats for Dichotomies and Layers first, with a clutch a-ha
of "what if it's this poem" very early on. (I tried to one-shot it with I HAVE
EATEN THE PLUMS IN THE ICEBOX, don't ask me why.)
The travel log was very helpful, with a lot of tiny features that matched what
we needed at different stages of solving. In case it wasn't clear, I found the
tech and hunt site UX impressive throughout the Hunt.

The first "full star" we opened was Dichotomies, followed by Crossword (this was shortly after
understanding what conversion meant, with those two being the easiest ones to
directly query). I think everything was signposted well enough, but still have
a complaint about Layers unlock. We understood the logic that single puzzles
were unlocked based on the number of matching words, but weren't sure how to
turn that into a meta unlock. Three people independently tried the intended
solution, not gotten it to work, and moved on. Eventually we gave up, sent a
hint, and were effectively told to try again. It turned out we'd all failed to
strip punctuation properly, with my attempt changing THERE'S to THERE S instead
of THERES. And like...man. I think the intended solution is already
not a great fit for the mechanic (given that it's technically a special case
of the 6+ category), but fair is fair, we all decided to try it so it was
definitely fine. The checking just needed to be more lenient.

While we were puzzling over Psychology options, Providence found the Coin, and
we unlocked our last Dimensions round, The Glitch. I had a brief moment of fear
that we'd need to redo the entire Kingdom, before reading the map more closely
and seeing it'd "just" be 9 puzzles.

Cardinality contacted our HQ to let us know hints would be more available if we
wanted them. This prompted an impromptu team vote, on whether to try to rush
for a Sunday 8 PM finish to guarantee a runaround slot, or take it more chill.
Hunt ops estimates were that we'd finish on Monday and miss runaround if we
took it chill, and maybe make 8 PM if we rushed. Somehow all vote decisions
on Level 1 Spicy end up close to 50-50, but rushing won out. We started hinting
very aggressively from then on.

[**Psychology:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/psychology)
This is the one part of Terminus I saw during Hunt. I don't know how, but
Terminus meta crew decided it'd be faster to reconstruct the minipuzzles
from sheets rather than ask the people who worked on them. More surprisingly,
this was correct.

[**Mixed Media:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/mixed_media)
We made partial progress in our first hour on the puzzle, but didn't get anything
solid. A hint led us to our first ??? entry, and we finished with no hints
from there. We proooooobably would have gotten there hintless, but I think it
would have only happened after 2 extra hours of staring. I still don't understand
why this theme was picked in particular, but liked the puzzle outside of that.

With a Terminus solve, the only thing left was Glitch. I didn't really know what
was going on in any feeder of Glitch, so I instead marshalled a group to gather
meta information about the glitches until a new feeder unlocked. (We could have
done Sportsball, but we asked Cardinality what we should focus on to finish
Hunt, and they warned us Sportsball was long and scary.)

[**Find M(at)e:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/find_mate)
Man, I suck at chess puzzles. I was totally useless at doing chess. You know
what I'm not useless at though? Setting up extraction spreadsheet formulas.
We did have a pretty tragic guess log, fueled by me trying to snipe the puzzle
before more chess happened.

IMAGE

Our timeout was...pretty long on our last guess, and we asked for a confirm
on our last letter from Cardinality to avoid a 10+ minute lockout on failure.
(I want it on the record that we were unanimous on what
to guess, and it would have been correct if we YOLOed, but it just wasn't worth
the risk to be wrong.) I'm sure we won't get burned by a high timeout again!

[**snalC ehT tcennoC:**](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/snalc_eht_tcennoc)
Can you have too many cooks on a puzzle? Absolutely. But at least half the
cooks could be distracted by updating our "Are we cooking?" meter.

IMAGE

The glitch phase passed fast enough that I didn't have time to parse what
was going on, but I knew enough to know our Connect the Clans map would be
helpful, and pulled it up early so I could start reading out extract locations
when we got to it. I was completely blindsided by the revelation
we weren't finished with MonQuest yet, and thought it was a cute finale
in the way it called back the capstone using MonArch + meta using feeders
part of the Kingdom. Just really neat design.

# Runaround!

We finished at about 9 PM Sunday, which didn't guarantee we'd get to do runaround,
but we got squeezed in for 11:30 PM Sunday. I was thankful we wouldn't have to
wake up early for a Monday slot.

As [To The Edge](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/to_the_edge) indicates, we were
directed to The Borderline tunnels. We were directed to download Artivive to give
AR information, which I dutifully did. Once I got there, I got the Dactylinion
feeder...which used the mural right in front of our faces and didn't require any AR component. Oh well!

We got to the room for [At the Close](https://puzzmon.world/puzzles/at_the_close),
which was "a real puzzle", to quote people working on the hyperbolic path. I
helped on the Dactylinion and Pointdexter feeder, did some of the crossword
clues, then sat back and watched. There was a limit to how many people could
crowd around our heptagons, so we found other ways to amuse ourselves.

IMAGE

We only brought one laptop, zoomed in far enough to make the color clues
visible. This caused the glitchy flavortext to stay off-screen for most of the
solve, and Cardinality needed to hint us to get us back on track. Since it
was the last runaround slot of the night, Cardinality offered to let us check our
answer with them before submitting, to make sure we didn't get timed out on the
puzzle.

Unfortunately, some people got very excited and submitted before they could
stop us...

IMAGE

By now we were alternating between projecting the puzzle page and projecting
levelxspicy.cooking, and the room *immediately* uncooked to the negatives.
I think the best way to describe the vibes is that poor Cardinality is
in this classroom at 1 AM, running one last runaround tonight out of the goodness
of their hearts,
and we replied with "You're not cooking us, we're cooking you".
They manually reset our rate limit to free us and we finished the Hunt.

IMAGE


# Spicy Takes

I would normally put this at the start of my Hunt post, but decided to put it at
the end to reward people who got this far.

I, at broad strokes, agree with [Dan Katz](https://puzzlvaria.wordpress.com/2026/01/19/2026-mit-mystery-hunt/)
that hinting has gotten very effective if you are trying to finish Hunt after
the Coin is found. Our vibes-based guess is that our aggressive hint posture
cut 8 hours off our finish time. Although, I don't think I would characterize it as
a metagame of talking your way to the information. In all of 2024, 2025, and
2026, the organizing team just asked us "what would make Hunt more fun for
you, now that the Coin is found?", and we chose what we wanted appropriately,
so it was less a charisma skill check and more picking what we wanted out
of an offered buffet. I would also like to see a Hunt where 10 teams finish without
hints, but I don't think such a Hunt can exist unless we adjust expectations to
having 30+ teams finish. Maybe we should!

More often than not, I've been on a team that finishes Hunt. I consider finishing
Hunt to be a privilege rather than a right. I'm pretty glad we got there, but
I continue to think a lot of people's disappointments around Hunt are tied to
picking milestones that can wildly vary each year. The difficulty of Hunt, where
the first meta is, where the first major HQ interaction is - these are all
things that drift each year in response to Hunt feedback, and it's near impossible
to accurately predict which will be in range of your team's solving abilities.
You can hope, and you can try, but it just isn't always going to happen.

That being said, I'd still prefer Hunt to be shorter. I said this last year too,
where we also finished, this isn't sour grapes or anything.

MIT Mystery Hunt is a long-running tradition, but to me, the tradition is its
existence rather than its form. The rise of online hunts has created a community
of solvers who do Mystery Hunt-tier difficulty puzzles throughout the calendar
year. These online hunts have always been around, but before there was like,
1-2 noteworthy events per year. Now there are enough that I can't do all of them.
Just last year, I did GPH 2025, LN Hunt 2025, Teammate Hunt 2025, Microsoft Hunt 2025, and Silph Puzzle Hunt 2025,
all of which had significant 3+ hour solve puzzles. I didn't even do
Brown Puzzlehunt or Vertex Hunt or the fall CMU Hunt...there's just a lot out
there these days. Mystery Hunt has evolved against that to be increasingly high
production value each year.

It's starting to
feel like there's a divide between people who only do Mystery Hunt each year, and
people who grind all the puzzles available to them. This has caused corresponding
divides in hunt norms. Personally, using hints early
has been beaten into me by online hunts. They often underestimate difficulty,
and using hints before you're hardstuck is the only way I can finish them before
the work week starts. Social media has accelerated this, in the way it's accelerated
all changes in culture. The 18 year old crack solvers who've spent formative
years reading devjoe's archive are now finding each other on Discord and
shitposting their way to victory.

To me, the crux is whether Mystery Hunt is broken, or Mystery Hunt is fine.
It's really not obvious to me which is true. I suspect people's answers
depend on whether they feel they are in the in-group or the out-group.
I am still on the train for general puzzles,
but decidedly off the train for subgenres like logic puzzles. An intro round
logic puzzle is now typically a complete killer for me, and this is even when
I do a few logic puzzles in spare time! There's levels to this.

I continue to be confused by people saying teams of 100-150+ are needed
to win. Team size has never been a good measure of solving strength and winning
teams have usually been on the < 100 people side rather than the > 100 people
side. The team size stats are all public, why do people keep believing this?


While working on this post, I was reminded that I'm becoming one of the old-timers
now. I've participated in Hunt every year in one way or another since 2012, I've
actually seen a lot. I'm in my 30s now,
trying to keep up with the youth online and only partly succeeding. I've already
crossed the threshold where coming to Hunt is significantly about seeing friends
rather than solving puzzles. I'm looking forward to seeing what Providence
pulls off next year.
