---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 17 - What's Your Time Travel Password?"
date:   2016-05-17 16:45:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

As far as I know, time travel doesn't exist. However, that doesn't mean
there's nothing interesting to say about it. In fact, you can do a lot
of [theorizing about models of time travel](https://qntm.org/time).

Today, I made a time travel password. What I'm going to do is detail the argument
for why everyone else should make one too.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

Suppose we're living in a world where time travel is possible, and that
furthermore time travel will be invented within our lifetime. I know this
is a huge assumption, but bear with me for a moment.

A world where people can transmit information to past versions of themselves
is very hard to predict. The nature of that world depends on the model of
time travel used, but the potential gains of time travel are huge.

However, *that means the potential losses of forged future messages are also
huge*. If you're in a world where time travel is possible, the strangest
requests in the world can be explained away by saying the future depends on it.
What makes decision making tricky is that it's almost always done under
uncertainty. Time travel removes that uncertainty, giving a perfect oracle
towards achieving the best outcome. Or, if a message is forged, a perfect oracle
towards achieving the *worst* outcome.

To prevent this, you need an authentication scheme that verifies future
messages come from you. Hence, time travel passwords! In the present, you
pre-commit to adding your time travel password to any message sent to a
past version of you. That way, if you ever receive such a message, you can
verify that message is legitimate.

Importantly, you never, under any circumstances, write down your time travel
password or speak it out loud. After the passphrase leaves your head, it's no longer secure.
As a corollary, every time travel password is one time use, and you must create
a new one whenever you receive a future message.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

There's a very natural objection to this: isn't time travel exceedingly
unlikely? Why should I waste my time making a password for non-existent technologies?

Well, consider the following.

* Creating a time travel password takes less than a minute.
* If time travel is never invented, you lose one minute of your life.
* If time travel is invented, you prevent a large class of attacks that could
be made against you.

The expected utility is vastly, vastly in favor of making a time travel
password. I'll fully admit this argument is a variant of
[Pascal's mugging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal's_mugging), which
you might reject for one reason or another.

Here's my counterargument. Yes, maybe I'm mugging you out of one minute of
your time. However, the value of one minute of your time is very, very low.
And even if time travel is never invented, you get to tell people you have a time
travel password! How awesome is that? You can explain this very argument, or link
to help increase my view counts (nod nod, wink wink).

Having a time travel password makes you a more interesting person, and that's surely
worth the one minute of time it costs you.
