---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 9 - Reality is The Null Hypothesis"
date:   2016-05-09 15:58:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

*Very minor spoilers for Ra, major spoilers for The Matrix*

Among the many excellent sequences of *Ra*, this is in my top 3.
To set the stage: Laura and Natalie have just come back from a harrowing
experience in the shared dreamscape called Tanako's world.
In that dreamscape, Laura killed someone. Natalie is not happy.

(For brevity, I've cut out some of the middle paragraphs.)

> Natalie pulls Laura aside. "I need you to do something for me."
>
> "Okay?"
>
> "I need you to stop killing people."
>
> Laura chokes. "Ah, what?"
>
> "You killed that person," Natalie says to Laura. "You could have vented the energy upwards, away from all of us. You vaporised him and you didn't need to."
>
> "He was threatening lives!"
>
> "You had neutralised that threat. That makes it murder." Natalie's tone of voice isn't even accusatory. It's completely flat.
>
> "I don't understand what you're saying. It was a dream."
>
> "**So when did you wake up?**"
>
> Laura steps through her memories one at a time. She remembers walking home. She walked all the way back from her memory palace to Tanako's world to the fissure to reality. It's a continuous record. "...We're awake right now, right?"
> 
> "That's the null hypothesis," says Natalie. "Until you can prove otherwise, always assume you're in reality. Now, repeat after me: 'We don't know what happened.'"

(qntm, *Ra*) LINK ME
{: .centered }

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

First off, if you like thinking about the nature of reality, check out *Ra*.
Reality is one of *Ra*'s running themes, and it's pretty great if you're okay
with the metaphysics.

Back to your regularly scheduled post. About two years ago, I remember telling
someone about the [simulation hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simulation_hypothesis).
The argument goes like this: suppose humanity can create high-fidelity simulations
of the world. Furthermore, suppose we one day simulate people who have
consciousness. Then, those simulated people may also simulate people who have
consciousness. The simulated people in the simulation may simulate more people.
The three-nested simulation may simulate more people. Repeat, and repeat.

In this set-up, there are many simulations, and only one reality. Thus, one
of three things must hold.

* Most civilizations cannot simulate self-aware beings.
* Most civilizations can simulate self-aware beings, but choose not to.
* Most civilizations can and do simulate self-aware beings.

And, if the last holds true, we are very likely living in a simulated world,
not a real one.

I accept this argument, and propose a new corollary. It goes like this: we're
probably a simulation, but who gives a shit? It's real to me.

In essence, I'm Cypher from *The Matrix*. Except, you know, with less murder,
and less betrayal of his friends.

PICTURE Of Cypher

A guy who's right, but is also an asshole
{: .centered }

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

The null hypothesis is that the world is real.

What if I was given proof that the world was a simulation? Let's handwave the
details, and assume that this proof is incredibly convincing and almost
impossible to fake.

Well, it doesn't change my position. Okay, now I know for sure the world isn't
real. *It's still real to me.* Presumably I don't get access to anything that
lets me alter my simulated reality, so I have to keep going with the constructed
rules of the world. I'm not bothered by the difference between natural rules
and constructed rules. They're all rules to me.

IT'S REAL TO ME DAMMIT GUY

A similar argument holds against the existence of perfect crimes. After a perfect
crime, there is no evidence of that crime. It is impossible for me to distinguish
between a world with perfect crimes and one without perfect crimes, so I shouldn't
bother thinking about it. The only time something should matter is if there is
a noticeable affect on the world.

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

Okay. What about virtual reality?

I got to try out a virtual reality headset last week, and it's quite impressive.
Right now, it's still slightly off from reality, but there were moments where I
genuinuely forgot I was in a room the whole time.

So, let's up the ante. Suppose VR technology starts looking very similar to
reality. You put on a VR headset, and jump into a constructed world. Are you
ethically obligated to act as if the constructed world is reality, or are you
free to act amorally?

At this point, I'm actually not so sure. Here's something I call the Reality
Turing Test.

> You put on a VR headset, and go to sleep. While sleeping, the proctor
> does one of two things. They either brings your sleeping body to a
> real life room and sets your headset to display the world around you, or
> they have the headset display a virtual reality. You wake up, and have to
> decide if you're looking at VR or looking at reality.

Right now, VR headsets don't pass this test. The graphics aren't perfect,
and occasionally there's a slight stutter. But in the future, VR headsets
may pass the Reality Turing Test, and that's where ethics gets complicated.
When you put on a VR headset, you're aware of the transition between reality
and virtual reality. But, if you act amorally in virtual reality, and virtual
reality is hard to distinguish from true reality, it's a very small step to
acting amorally in the real world.

If you agree with my position, then at some point in the future video game
designers are obligated to keep VR video games as *unrealistic* as possible, to
maximize the gaps between VR and reality. A video game character is a monster
when compared to real life people.

Reality may be the null hypothesis, but in a future where we can approximate
reality to high-fidelity, it may not be the only null hypothesis. That's a bit
more scary than it sounds.

We're not there yet. I'd say we're not even close to there yet. But the ethics
are interesting to think about, and we can't punt them down the horizon forever.

> "You know, choosing not to choose isn't really a decision."

(Twilight Sparkle, *Friendship is Magic*)
{: .centered }
