---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 8 - Shut Up And Write"
date:   2016-05-08 22:59:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

When it's 10:20 PM, I have to write a 500 word post, and
I have no idea what's I'm going to write about, you know I'm
going to dredge the bottom of the self-reference barrel.

So, I have 100 minutes to write a post. By itself, this wouldn't
be the trickiest task. Some of the posts on previous days were written
in less time than that. However, on those days I knew I would be
time-crunched, and deliberately thought about a topic I wanted to
write about. That let me plan out an outline in advance. When you
know what you want to say, it's surprisingly easy to say it.

Today, I didn't think of a topic ahead of time, and here we are.
Let's see if my lightly edited stream of consciousness is remotely coherent.

First off, I could always just give up. It's $20 if I don't write a post.
Twenty dollars
isn't that much for me, which I'm sure says something about
my socioeconomic status. But here I am, writing out words.

So, let's assume I'm acting rationally, or at least acting in a way
that could be interpreted as the actions of a rational person. Then,
we immediately prove some interesting things about myself. For instance,
I value 100 minutes of my time at more than $20.

That assumes I get nothing out of writing blog posts,
or rising to meet one of my self-imposed challenges. I get a really
big sense of accomplishment when I finish something, and that feeling
is definitely worth more than $20 to me. In retrospect, the feeling
of accomplishment is worth a LOT more than that - it might be my
primary motivator. It was one of the biggest things that made deciding
not to go to grad school so difficult. Should probably keep a closer
eye on that part of myself.

Now, on the other hand...I have a final tomorrow. I have not
studied for this final as much as I should have. Evidently, I value
writing blog posts and going on road trips to LA more than
studying for finals. Which I guess makes
sense. Writing tons of garbage and doing random things in LA
is so much more interesting than
reading my scribbled notes from weeks long past. I can justify not
studying by saying "I'm a second semester senior", "I'm taking this
class pass-no pass", and from your perspective you might be wondering
why I feel guilty at all. But I do. It's probably tied to that feeling
of accomplishment. The feeling I get when I fail to do something
simply because I didn't put in enough time is terrible. For me, there
isn't some line in the sand marking things I want to do and things
I should do but don't want to. It's one big gradient of priorities and
procrastination. Envisioning achievement motivates working towards that
achievement, even if the path required to get there isn't worth it in
the end.

> you'll never give up, even if there's, uh... absolutely NO benefit to persevering whatsoever. if i can make that clear. no matter what, you'll just keep going. not out of any desire for good or evil... but just because you think you can. and because you "can"... ... you "have to"

(Naming the source would be a spoiler.)
{: .centered }

Hey, will you look at that. I hit 500 words! Cool. Nice. See you all next time.

(Also, I think I'll be fine for the final. If I'm not, well, life is one
big tapestry. In any piece of work that big, it's expected that patches of it will be baby barf green.)
