---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 27 - ??????"
date:   2016-05-27 02:42:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

If there's anything I like, it's when people do something interesting
with structure.

A good example of this is from the Firefly fanfic *Forward*. To indicate
River's...spaciness, her thoughts are centered instead of left-aligned,
and randomly shifts into bolds or italics.

Another example comes up in *Ra*. Depending on where events take place,
the text is left-aligned or right-aligned.

I'm not quite sure why I like when people mess with structure, but
my closest guess is that toying with the structure reveals our implicit
assumptions about that structure. By adjusting it in the right way, authors can
reveal those structural assumptions, then push their boundaries.
That lets them send ideas without changing the words themselves.
Done properly, it gives a sense of completeness - the text content
gets tied to the medium itself.

When I write blog posts, I'm on the lookout for ways I can play with
structural expectations. In yesterday's post, I was pretty
pleased with myself for finding a way to use

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

twice in a row, once to indicate how I use it as a section break and once
as an actual section break.
(I'm also pleased I strecthed that gag into this post, but it's wearing
thin and I'll stop.)

On occasions, that leads to self-descriptive writing. A while back, I
used parallelism when describing how I used parallelism, and used a
two sentence paragraph when explaining why I liked short paragraphs.

For a while, I was seriously
considering writing a post made entirely from quotations.
I would have cited quotes about plagiarism, using the structure to show
I was copying everything I could find. At the same time, the structure
would also show how synthesizing all the ideas together was enough
to make it original, and arguably not plagiarism at all.
Look, I even have some prototype quotes I was going to use.

> There is nothing new under the sun.

(Ecclesiastes)
{: .centered }

> Plagiarize  
> Let no one else's work evade your eyes  
> Remember why the good Lord made your eyes  
> So don't shade your eyes  
> But plagiarize, plagiarize, plagiarize  
> Only be sure always to call it please "research"  

(Lobachevsky by Tom Lehrer)
{: .centered }

> If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.

(Isaac Newton)
{: .centered }

> To steal ideas from one person is plagiarism; to steal from many is research.

(The [source](http://quoteinvestigator.com/2010/09/20/plagiarism/) is complicated)
{: .centered }

Eventually I abandoned this project. The reward-to-effort ratio was
enormous and too big to justify.
I still like it conceptually, but it was too hard to make it real.
Eventually I tried a quote-heavy post in [Memorable Quotes]({% post_url 2016-05-16-may-16 %})
and called it a day.

I know of one other person who came up with a similarly convoluted structure,
and actually went through with it. That person would be Mark Rosewater,
head designer for Magic: the Gathering. He writes weekly articles about the
design of the current sets, and sometimes about game design as a whole.

Way back in 2004, he decided to write an article on
[Elegance](http://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/making-magic/elegance-2004-10-18-48).
It is the most divisive article he's ever written. I haven't kept up with
MTG very closely, but I doubt anything has matched the backlash or praise he
got.

The structure is completely insane. The article is a home page of 50 words.
Each word is a link to another 50 word snippet. It's conceptually beautiful,
but it's also horrendously difficult for the reader.
The fanmail got crazy enough that he ended up spending next week's
[article](http://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/making-magic/elegant-response-2004-11-01)
on how people responded to "Elegance".

I'd recommend reading his response article by itself, but I'll briefly summarize
it here. Rosewater's key point was that elegance was a very difficult concept
to explain. It was so difficult that he felt the best way to explain elegance
was to have the article itself be elegant. He wanted to highlight the gap between
elegant concepts and elegant executions, so he wrote an article that showed how
one didn't imply the other. The disconnect between the structure and its
readiblity was the whole point of the article. The words themselves were less
important.

Personally, I got sick of "Elegance" around the 7th link, but after reading
his rseponse, I have a lot of respect for the idea. It's a fantastic example
of how structure influences communication.
