---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 19 - Working Assuming Futility"
date:   2016-05-19 22:11:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

I've been working all day on turning my final project for CS 281B into
a NIPS paper all of today. The submission deadline is tomorrow, 9 AM.
I have no idea how I convinced myself this was a good idea.

First off, the odds that I actually get accepted to NIPS is almost nil.
My final project has the bare minimum of algorithm design to make it even
justifiable to write a paper in the first place, and the experiments I ran
all gave negative results. Furthermore, I worked on this project entirely by
myself, with little to no input from any grad students/professors. That means
my writeup is going to be very unrefined. I don't have the time to get feedback
on my writing, because everyone I know who could give feedback is busy attending
ICRA, and the time it would take for me to explain what I'm doing and for them
to read my paper isn't worth it. Even if this was the most well-written paper
in the world, the combination of not very novel ideas and negative results
feels like a death sentence.

What makes this an even worse idea is that I didn't even learn about the NIPS
deadline until 2 days ago. Sure, let's submit to NIPS! Why not! It's not like
I've spent the past few days playing Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney in my
pajamas all day, meaning I have to go through a super jarring context shift
into the work all day mindset.
It's not like this is my last week staying at Berkeley, and
I should probably be trying to meet up with friends before we all head away
from one another. OH WAIT, EXCEPT BOTH THOSE THINGS ARE TRUE? YEAH, THEY ARE.

UUUUUUGGGGGGHHHHHHHH.

(Yes, if you couldn't tell I'm a bit annoyed with myself. It was probably a
bad idea to even write a blog post when I'm in such a mood, but here we are.
On the raggedy edge.)

Look, I even did an estimation in my head, and decided it wasn't worth sending
my paper around for feedback, because it would take away time from people
working on *their* papers, and the marginally improved chance for my paper
isn't worth diminishing the chances of people who actually have significant
progress. Maybe this is circular logic I'm giving myself to not talk to
people, but at this point I'm too tired for self improvement or
internal consistency.

By the way, if you were expecting a post about existential risk and why
it's justifiable to act in situations where you almost always receive
failure, I'm sorry the title baited you. See, that's what I thought
this post was going to be about, but my stream of consciousness decide to
hijack it into a rant post and I don't have the time to do that topic
full justice. I'm writing this on an insanely short deadline because I
need to both finish this post and finish my paper before midnight.
Tomorrow I need to wake up early and, like, go to the CS graduation
ceremony.

Anyways this post is a huge pile of bullshit. I'm cheating
myself for writing this just to make sure I don't have to pay $20, but
I set the rules! Only myself to blame for writing piss poor posts!

If I had the time to write a decent post, here's the ideas I would
have tried to convey.

* The odds of me getting accepted are small, but I was always planning
to refine my final project for my research page currently under construction.
The NIPS deadline just gave me a good deadline to actually work on it
and spring me out of my hedonistic haze.
* When the paper is done, I'll get to say I submitted a paper to
a top tier machine learning conference, which is actually a decently big
deal. Of course anybody can do this, so it's secretly not a big deal.
* I'm not sure how I feel about existential risk, but in this case the
journey of finding the best way to explain my ideas to a curious but
unfamiliar audience and the experience I get doing so is the big
thing I'm getting out of this.

I didn't have the time to find a good way to naturally bring all this
up, so instead you get a bullet point text dump. Sorry!

Okay this is actually closer to 700 words, not 500.
I'm outta here, I've got a paper to write.
