---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 12 - I Just Watched Someone Eat a Sandwich While Blindfolded"
date:   2016-05-12 10:20:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

Today, I watched a blindfolded man eat and critique Chicago's
two most popular Italian beef sandwiches.

<div class="centered">
    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/dhQKa-rF878" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>
<br>

Why did I do this?

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

The first reason is simple. I was bored. My browser was already open to YouTube,
and this video appeared in my recommendations.

That's an okay explanation, but I'm not satisfied with it. Why did I choose to
watch YouTube instead of opening a Steam game? Why did I click on that
video instead of any of the other YouTube recommendations? When I reflect
on my decisions, I always assume there's a reason behind my behavior. This is true
even if I don't know why I did something. In that case, it just means my
subconscious influenced me in a certain way, and it's up to me to puzzle
out the pieces.

Let's consider a few hypotheses that might have played into my decision.


The Novelty Hypothesis
-----------------------------------------------------------------

I'm not 100% sure of this, but I'd guess most people don't spend their time
watching blindfolded food critics eat sandwiches. Just a hunch.

That makes this video special. How often have I seen blindfolded taste testing?
Not very often. From an [exploration-exploitation]({% post_url 2016-05-04-may-4 %})
perspective, that places a ton of value of watching it once. Maybe I'm actually
a huge fan of blindfolded taste-testing. I have to watch to make sure.

However, by that logic I should be watching every video on YouTube, because
I haven't seen anything quite like it yet. This explanation doesn't
accurately incorporate my prior beliefs.
Yes, novelty played a role in my decision, but *I must have
already had a prior belief that this specific blindfolded taste testing video
would be worth watching.*

Luckily, it's easier to explain where that belief came from.


The Nostalgia Hypothesis
------------------------------------------------------------------

This video isn't of any food critic, it's of Alton Brown, host of Good
Eats. I used to watch Good Eats as a kid, because

* It taught the science behind cooking in a way that a kid could
understand
* I got to watch someone cook delicious food.

Nostalgia is a very powerful force. My past enjoyment from watching
Good Eats must have made me interested in watching more Alton Brown
videos.

This satisfies my curiosity by enough, but for completeness let's add one
more detail.


The Celebrity Hypothesis
------------------------------------------------------------------

I've watched some of Alton Brown's videos in the past. See
[Grilled Grilled Cheese](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RllWJUvrxEY)
and [Champagne Saber Time](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qCp9-tEHa8U).

Again, these are entertaining videos. And that's the key. Alton
Brown is, at heart, an entertainer. He's a celebrity in the food world.
I don't want to get into stardom theory, because my memory of it
is fairly hazy, but you could call me a fan of his. The natural
instinct of fandom is to watch everything related to the fandom,
and thus, Alton Brown YouTube videos.

It doesn't matter that I've never been to Chicago, and have no opinions
on Italian beef sandwiches. If Alton Brown is giving a review, I'm going
to find it interesting, because I trust his work to be good.

Now if you'll excuse me, I'm hungry. Time to head to a sandwich place.
