---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 26 - Titles Are Hard"
date:   2016-05-26 16:42:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

When I look back on the posts I've been writing this month,
I notice I've been using a lot fewer section headings than
I did in my previous posts. Instead of making up a section
title, I'll add a divider like

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

And move on to the next topic. I wonder why?

\*\*\*
{: .centered }

One reason I've been doing this is that making up titles
is hard. No, really, it's awful. Fun fact: back when I first
set up a personal site on Blogger, its title was actually
"Titles Are Hard". This was back when I indulged in
recursion and self-reference a bit more than I should have.
(I blame [*The  Monster at the End of This Book*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Monster_at_the_End_of_This_Book:_Starring_Lovable,_Furry_Old_Grover) for
awakening that part of myself.)

Now, it may not have been a good blog title, but at least it was
accurate. It is really hard to create a
good section title, especially when I'm writing by the
seat of my pants. When I use a title, the implicit promise I'm
giving to the reader is that the title is going to be related
to the upcoming section, possibly in some pithy way.

**This is so hard to do well!** Look, here's how my writing has gone this
month.
First, I come up with some seed topic. From there, I
let the idea germinate into whatever it wants. I then prune the extra leaves
to make it appear like I had a plan of what to write all along.
But, when
I place pressure to produce more quickly, I don't have time to do lots
of pruning. To continue this tortured analogy, I allow the plant to grow with
no constraints, realize I'm
running out of time, trim the most blatant errant leaves, and reveal
what I have so far. Then it's on to the next plant.

For me, writing is this gradual process where I realize what I want to write
after I write it.
When the topic is always shifting under my feet, it's hard to pick a title
that matches the ideas I've been talking about. This blogging gauntlet
is focused on raw output. That means there are no incentives to go back and decide
on good titles, because that takes time, time I could spend writing more
material instead.

Whatever cleanliness there is in my writing is simply the byproduct of whatever
I find acceptable on that day, nothing more.

An Ending of Sorts
------------------------------------------

While I'm on this topic, you know what else is terrible? Endings.
I have without fail hated my ending on every first draft.
If I had the time that day, I would rewrite the ending again and again until
it was acceptable. More commonly, I left it the way it was.

Much in the way that it's hard for me to come up with a pithy way to sum
up a section, it's hard for me to come up with a nice way to end the post
as a whole. Conversations don't have a fixed ending, they continue until the
points naturally die. In writing, the standards are different. People expect
to read [something to take home](http://alumni.media.mit.edu/~cahn/life/gian-carlo-rota-10-lessons.html).

On the other hand, I've read several blog posts
that also didn't have a good conclusion. They simply stopped at the moment they
said everything they were planning to say.

Maybe that's okay after all.
