---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 18 - ?????"
date:   2016-05-18 20:06:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

*This builds upon the ideas from [yesterday's post]({% post_url 2016-05-17-may-17 %}).
Read that one first.*

First off, here's some trivia I learned from the [TVTropes page on trust passwords](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TrustPassword):
Harry Houdini and his wife Bess developed secret passphrases which he promised
to say to her if he found a way to contact her from the afterlife. After his
death, Bess used those passphrases to debunk several spirit mediums. Or,
as put by [MagicPedia](http://www.geniimagazine.com/magicpedia/The_Houdini_Code),
"Bess begain the tradition of holding a seance to see whether Houdint could
escape from death."

Can I just say: this is totally badass. See? Wasn't that super interesting, and
worth a minute of your time?

Anyways, so I've been thinking about the security of time travel passwords.
Suppose you're kidnapped, and your kidnappers are trying to coerce you to
reveal your time travel password, because they want to modify history
through you. What do you do?

Well, first off you could obviously lie about your password. However, this
could lead to issues, depending on if the adversary can verify whether
messages they sent into the past have changed the present. If they cannot
verify any changes to the present, you're in the clear. If they can, you're
sunk, because they'll know you're lying.

This doesn't mean you shouldn't create a time travel password. It still
stops future adversaries from messing with you, and you always have the option
of giving the adversary your password. And in some sense, this is good enough.
If you have the password, you must be able to convince your past self your
message is from the future, because otherwise your authetication scheme
is broken. If you're convinced that cooperating with your kidnappers is in your
best interest, that's it. There's no authentication scheme in the world that
is secure against your own cooperation, because any authentication scheme that
does so would also block access if there were no kidnappers coercing you.

(I'm not sure I'm explaining this idea well. Turn it over a few times if
this is confusing you.)

Still, a time travel password scheme isn't secure against mistakes. In fact, it's
incredibly insecure against mistakes! Suppose I accidentally say my time travel
password out loud. Anyone present can now pretend to be me from the future, **and
I have no way to tell my past self their time travel password is no longer
secure.** If we reveal our password in real life, we can request a password change,
but this doesn't work for time travel. You can't retroactively change your memory.
You could send a message telling your past self to change their time travel
password, but that assumes you can send a message before anybody else.
