---
layout: post
title:  "The Blogging Gauntlet: May 24 - Free to be Weird"
date:   2016-05-24 16:10:00 -0700
---

{% include gauntlet.md %}

> I'm here to show you who I am   
> Throw off the veil, it's finally time   
> There's more to me than glitz and glam,  
> And now I feel my stars align.

If it wasn't already clear, I'm a pretty weird dude.

Spend enough time with me and you'll discover I'm one of those people
who are "from the Internet". I'm a big *Friendship is Magic* fan, meaning
I've read over two million words of fanfiction and have spent money
buying comics from the Expanded Universe.

(Yes, MLP has an Expanded Universe. I know, it's absurd.)

In high school, I got into the [*Touhou*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touhou_Project) fandom.
I only follow the music side, but it's a thriving scene, and I find lots
of it objectively good even without the Touhou context.
The first music album I downloaded to my phone was [BEGIERDE DES ZAUBERER](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqUuvRkFfLI),
a metal album by Demetori. On reflection, they're actually my favorite
band, ever. I've yet to find anyone as consistently amazing.

Meanwhile, I read a decent number of webcomics, as my [reviews page](/webcomicrecs/)
can attest to.
I have a [Dinosaur Comics](http://qwantz.com/index.php) T-shirt.
I have a [Homestuck](http://www.mspaintadventures.com/?s=6) T-shirt.
I also have a [Gunnerkrigg Court](http://gunnerkrigg.com/?p=1) T-shirt,
a Gunnerkrigg Court whiteboard, a metal
Gunnerkrigg Court coin I received for backing the Legendary Showdown Kickstarter,
and...look, Gunnerkrigg Court is really good, okay? You should check it out.

The point being, I'm part of a lot of subcultures, and
I never felt like I had to hide that when growing up. I did for a while, until
I realized I didn't have to.
I openly played Magic: the Gathering in middle school. I admitted to reading
fanfiction in high school, and although my friends gave me shit for it, it was
all in good fun. By the time I hit college I was well into the
"from the Internet" niche.

This is completely at odds with the K-12 education people complain about,
where everyone's an asshole and it feels like hell.
I'm not saying that my school didn't have issues, but any issues it did have
somehow never reached me. **I had the freedom to reveal whatever I wanted
about myself without having to worry about what people thought**.
It didn't matter if there were people who did care, because there were enough people
who didn't to make my behavior socially viable.

In contrast, there are people who have to bottle up the weird things about
themselves, not because they don't want to share them, but because they
can't share them without ostracizing themselves. I find that really sad. It's
only in retrospect that I can see how fortunate my environment was. I'm
not sure how I would turned out if I got bullied for things I liked.

In Season 5 of MLP, there's an episode where an old friend comes back to
Ponyville. She's hit the big time, but over the course of the episode she
realizes she's drifted too far from who she was for the sake of fame.
It eventually builds into this quote.

> The *real* perk of friendship is gettin' to see your friend
> bein' true to their self. And Rara, when you're simply yourself,
> you're the brightest star I've ever seen shine.

And then, into one of my favorite songs from the show.

<div class="centered">
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/buuYIBejsuM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

I don't any reason to stop being weird, so I'm sticking to it. Until next time.

> And now I see those colors   
> Right before my eyes   
> I hear my voice so clearly   
> And I know that it is right   
>
> They thought I was weak, but I am strong   
> They sold me the world, but they were wrong   
> And now that I'm back, I still belong   
> 'Cause I know   
>
> That I am just a pony   
> I make mistakes from time to time   
> But now I know the real me   
> And put my heart out on the line   
>
> And let the magic in my heart stay true   
> Whoa-whoa-whoa-whoa   
> And let the magic in my heart stay true   
> Whoa-whoa-whoa-whoa   
> Just like the magic inside of you   
>
> Just like the magic inside of you...
